2119

   
   
     

 

= ee es
tan ragons

 

 

 

The second set of new monsters
for your SPELLJAMMER™ campaign!

 
 

 

 

   

Appendix
Monstrous Compendium

CREDITS

Design:

Scott Davis: Allura, Contemplator, Grav, Gullion, Insectare, Pristatic,
Silatic;

Newton Ewell: Bionoid, Constellate, Firebird, Gadabout, Gammaroid,
Gossamer, Great Dreamer, Grell, Sleek, Spirit Warrior, Starfly,
Stargazer, Star Selkie, Stellar Dragon, Witchlight Marauders,
Xixchil, Zurchin;

John Terra: Alchemy Plant, Aperusa, Astrosphinx, Autognome,
Bloodsac, Buzzjewel, Dohwar, Dreamslayer, Dweomerborn, Fal,
Feesu, Firelich, Flowfiend, Gonn, Greatswan, Lhee, Mercurial
Slime, Meteorspawn, Monitor, Moon Dragon, Scro, Skullbird,
Sluk, Space Owl, Space Swine, Stellar Undead, Sun Dragon,
Yitsan

Original Design Concept for Monstrous Compendium: David “Zeb”
Cook, Steve Winter, and Jon Pickens

Editor: Allen Varney

Typesetting: Gaye O'Keefe

Artistic Coordinator: Peggy Cooper

Cover Art: Jeff Easley

Interior Art:: Thomas Baxa and Mark Nelson

 

Distributed to the book trade by Random House, Inc., and in Canada by Random House Ltd. Distributed to the toy and hobby
trade by regional distributors. Distributed in the United Kingdom by TSR Ltd.

Distributed to the book trade in the United Kingdom by Random Century Group.

This work is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America. Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the
material or artwork herein is prohibited without the express written consent of TSR, Inc.

ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, GREYHAWK, DRAGON, and AD&D are registered trademarks owned by TSR, Inc.
SPELLJAMMER, POLYHEDRON, and the TSR logo are trademarks owned by TSR, Inc.

©1091 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Printed in the U.S.A.

ISBN #1-56076-071-0

Lake Geneva

aS TSR, Ltd.
120 Church End, Cherry Hinton
Cambridge CB1 3LB
United Kingdom
TSR, Inc.
ALPHABETICAL INDEX TO SPELLJAMMER™ MONSTERS

This index includes all monsters published to
date for the AD&D® SPELL] ER™ cam-
paign background. The code following each
monster's name designates its source:

LV—Lorebook of the Void in the SPELL-
JAMMER Campaign Set

MC7—the first SPELLJAMMER Monstrous
Compendium

MC9—this Monstrous Compendium

SJA1—Adventure 1, Wildspace

S)A2—Adventure 2, Skull & Crossbows

$)A3—Adventure 3, Crystal Spheres

SJR1—Accessory 1, Lost Ships

D#159—DRAGON® Magazine #159, July
90

P#55—POLYHEDRON™ Magazine #55
(Sept/Oct 90)

Aartuk MC7
Air Stealer, see Shadowsponge

Albari MC7
Alchemy Plant McC9
Allura McC9
Ancient Mariner MC?
Andeloid D#159
Aperusa Mc9
Arcane LV
Archlich, see Lich, Arch

Argos MC7
Astereater MC7
Asteroid Spider, see Spider, Asteroid
Astrosphinx, see Sphinx, Astro

Autognome MC9
Beholder Mage SJA1
Beholder-Kin MC7
Beholder, Undead (Death Tyrant) SJR1
Beholder Eater (Thagar) SJR1
Beholder LV
Bionoid MC9
Blazozoid MC7
Bloodsac MC9
Bubble, Giant, see Tinkerer

Buzzjewels MC9
Chakchak P#55
Chattur MC7
Clockwork Horror MC7
Colossus MC7
Comet Steed SJA3
Constellate MC9
Contemplator MC9
Death Shade SJA2
Death Tyrant, see Beholder, Undead
DeGleash Plasmoid, see Plasmoid

DelNoric Plasmoid, see Plasmoid

Delphinid MC7
Director, see Beholder-Kin

Dizantar MC7
Dohwar MCc9
Dracon LV
Dragon, Moon MC9
Dragon, Celestial, see Dragon, Radiant
Dragon, Stellar Mc9
Dragon, Sun MC9
Dragon, Radiant (Celestial) LV
Dreamslayer MC9
Dweomerborn MC9
Elmarin LV
Ephemeral LV
Esthetic MC7
Examiner, see Beholder-Kin

Fal MC9
Feesu MC9

Fire-Breathing Phase Doppleganger Giant
Space Hamster, see Hamster, Giant Space

Firebird MC9
Firelich MC9
Flow Barnacle SJR1
Flowfiend MC9
Focoid MC7
Fractine MC7
Furnace Golem, see Golem, Furnace
Gadabout MC9
Gammaroid MC9
Giant Bubble, see Tinkerer

Giant, Spacesea MC7

Giant Space Hamster, see Hamster, Giant
Space

Giff LV

Gith, Pirate of, see Pirate of Gith

Golem, Radiant MC7

Golem, Furnace MC7

Gonn MC9

Grav MC9

Gravislayer MC7

Great Old Master, see Neogi

Great Dreamers MC9

Greatswan MC9

Grell, Colonial MC9

Grimgobbler, see Beholder Eater

Grommam MC7

Gullion MCc9

Haagathga, see Bloodsac

Hadozee MC7

Hamster, Giant Space MC7
Hive Mother, see Beholder

Horror, Clockwork, see Clockwork Horror

Hurwaet, see Wiggle

Infernite D#159
Infinity Vine, see Vine, Infinity

Insectare MC9
Isopterite SJA3
Jammer Leech MC7
Kindori (Space Whale) LV
Krajen LV
Lakshu MC?
Leech, Jammer, see Jammer Leech

Lensman, see Beholder-Kin

Lhee Mc9
Lich, Arch SJR1
Lumineaux MC7
Lutum (Mud-Woman) MC7
MagiStar P#55

Mariner, Ancient, see Ancient Mariner

Men: Wonderseeker SJR1
Mercurial Slime Mc9o
Metagdem D#1s9
Meteorspawn Mc9
Mimic, Space MC7
Misi MC?
Monitor MC9
Moon, Rogue MC7
Mortiss MC7
Mud-Woman, see Lutum

Murderoid MC7
Nay-Churr MC7
Neogi: Undead Old Master SJR1
Neogi LV
Ontalak Plasmoid, see Plasmoid

Oortling P#55
Orbus, see Beholder

Overseer, see Beholder-Kin

Owl, Space MC9
Phlog-Crawler MC7
Pirate of Gith MC7
Plasman MC7
Plasmoid MC7
Pristatic MC9
Puffer MC7

 

Pyroserpent

Q'nidar

Radiant Golem, see Golem, Radiant
Rastipede

Reigar

Rock Hopper

Rogue Moon, see Moon, Rogue
Salt Wiggle, see Wiggle
Sarphardin (Watcher)

Scavver

Scro

Selkie, Star

Sentinel

Shadowsponge (Air Stealer)
Shakti, see Reigar

Silatic

Silver Slime

Skullbird

Sleek

Slime, Mercurial, see Mercurial Slime
Slime, Silver, see Silver Slime
Slinker

Sluk

Space Drake

Space Whale, see Kindori
Space Mimic, see Mimic, Space
Space Swine

SJA3
MC7

MC7
MC7
MC7

SJR1

LV
MC9
MC9
SJA1
SJR1

MC9
SJA1
MC9
MC9

MC7
MC9
SJA2

MC9

Space Hamster, Giant, see Hamster, Giant

Space
Spacesea Giant, see Giant, Spacesea
Spaceworm
Sphinx, Astro
Spider, Asteroid
Spirit Warrior
Spiritjam
Starfly
Stargazer
Survivor
Swamp Wiggle, see Wiggle
Syllix
Symbiont
Thagar, see Beholder Eater
Tinkerer (Giant Bubble)
Undead, Stellar

SJR1
MC9
MC7
MC9
MC7
MC9
MC9
MC7

MC7
MC7

SJR1
MC9

Undead Old Master, see Neogi: Undead Old

Master

Undead Beholder, see Beholder, Undead
Vampire SJA3, MC1
Vine, Infinity MC7
Watcher, see Sarphardin

Watcher, see Beholder-Kin ;
Wiggle (Hurwaet) MC7
Witchlight Marauders MC9
Wizshade MC?
Wonderseeker, see Men: Wonderseeker
Wryback MC7
Xixchil MC9
Yitsan MC9
Zard MC7
Zodar MC7
Zurchin MC9
Alchemy Plant

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Single Plant
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Any
INTELLIGENCE: Semi- (1)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1
ARMOR CLASS: See below
MOVEMENT: Nil

HIT DICE: 1
THACO: Nil

NO. OF ATTACKS: Nil
DAMAGE/ATTACK: Nil
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: S (1-3’ tall)
MORALE: Nil

XP VALUE: 25

An alchemy plant can change its essence into that of any inor-
ganic matter that touches it. The plant can also convert one mate-
rial into another, as explained below. Matter that was formerly
alive, such as a wooden staff, cotton or wool clothing, or a
corpse, also qualifies for transformation purposes. The plant is
highly sought by alchemists.

The plant normally looks like an unremarkable bush with ser-
rated green leaves. It grows anywhere, using its transmuting abil-
ity to thrive in exotic environments. The only distinguishing
characteristic is the lack of other vegetation in a 1’ radius around
the plant.

Combat: The alchemy plant easily falls victim to a thoughtless
swing of an adventurer’s sword or the teeth of a hungry her-
bivore. However, it senses other live plants growing within 20’;
when such plants take damage, the alchemy plant recognizes this
and instinctively reacts to preserve itself by transforming into
some nearby substance.

For this reason, the alchemy plants that survive best grow be-
side rocks. As a herbivore is about to chomp into the succulent
brown stalks, the alchemy plant turns into a plant-shaped rock.
The plant can also transform in the split-second after a weapon
makes contact and before it cuts through the plant, resulting in a
solid steel plant. The plant saves vs. crushing blow, using the
column appropriate to the material it has duplicated. Of course, a
weapon striking such a plant must also save! The transformation
lasts so long as danger still threatens.

Habitat/Society: Alchemy plants grow wild, converting inor-
ganic matter in the soil into food. They do not photosynthesize;
thus, they do not require light. Alchemy plants take in carbon di-
oxide and exhale oxygen, providing an important service to spell-
jamming vessels.

The alchemy plant can transform substances into other sub-
stances. When two objects touch the plant, one is transformed
into the other's substance. Roll randomly (an even chance) to de-
termine the object transformed. Thus, to make, the plant create
gold, touch the plant with a rock, then a piece of gold—and cross
your fingers! An alchemy plant can convert one pound of matter
per foot of plant height, to a maximum of three pounds. The
transformation works only once per day.

 

 

Supposedly smart people have touched gold to an alchemy
plant, watched the plant turn to gold, then pulled it out of the
ground. The result is a dead green bush: The plant must stay alive
to keep its own transformation intact, though this does not apply
to other transformed matter.

A charm plant spell or a potion of plant control ensures pre-
cisely the transformation the caster desires. Attempts to convince
the plant to effect a transformation using speak with plants sel-
dom work. The plant cannot be bullied, as it has no concept of its
own death or pain. Only a druid can hope to convince the plant
to create a transformation; the druid must make an Intelligence
check to succeed.

Alchemy plants cannot duplicate magical energy. Thus, for in-
stance, a candle of invocation touched against the alchemy plant
creates only a small block of wax.

Every month, the alchemy plant has a 5% chance to produce a
new seed. The seed is hurled by explosive force to a new spot 10d6
yards away from the parent. (An unfortunate character who in-
tercepts the seed in its flight takes 1 hp damage.) The seed grows
from seedling to maturity in two weeks.

Ecology: Alchemy plants are at the bottom of the food chain, giv-
ing nutrition to wandering herbivores. Beyond this, only sages,
mages, and alchemists have any interest in the plant, since its per-
formance is undependable. Still, the alchemy plant can be found
on board human, elvish, and illithid ships, where it freshens the
air and possibly provides needed substances.
Allura

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Group
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Highly (14)
TREASURE: WwW
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1-6
ARMOR CLASS: 6
MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 6+1
THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d8 (weapon)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spells
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Spells
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 20%

SIZE: M (5')
MORALE: Elite (14)
XP VALUE: 975

The allura are a race of reptilian monsters who lure spacefaring
men to their doom using innate magical abilities. They use their
limited shapechanging power to disguise themselves as beautiful
females of their victims’ race. Spells or devices that pierce illu-
sions cannot detect an allura’s true form.

The allura most often resemble beautiful human women, al-
ways Wearing ornate clothing and flashing exquisite jewelry.

Combat: Allura feed on the emotions created by tension, excite-
ment, and fear. To gather these emotions, the allura can cast the
following spells at 12th level once per day: charm person, sleep,
friends, suggestion, demand, clairaudience, clairvoyance, de-
lude, and mass suggestion.

The allura have another innate ability, detect life. This ability
lets the allura automatically detect the presence of life within
500’.

When a spelljammer appears in their area, the allura quickly
use clairvoyance to locate the spelljamming wizard and demand
to lure him to them. Once they sight the ship, the allura pretend
to be shipwreck survivors or escaped prisoners from a slave ship.

Once they board a ship, the allura quickly and invisibly take
over key personnel with their spells. All members of the crew get
the usual saving throws against each spell, but if one allura’s spell
doesn’t work, the other allura are ready to cast theirs on the
strong-willed crew members. If any can still resist, the allura have
no compunction against fighting more conventionally, using all
the offensive spells and weapons at their disposal.

Once they control most of the crew, the allura create illusions
that evoke strong emotion, such as battles or the dangers of wild-
space. One tale tells of allura who convinced a dragonship crew
to attack a neogi deathspider. Though the dragonship was de-
stroyed, the allura fed well.

After two weeks, the captured survivors become listless and
drained from the allura’s emotional vampirism. Crew members in
this condition have their Constitution, Strength and Intelligence
scores temporarily halved. The allura magically incapacitate the
now-useless crew and abandon the survivors on the nearest aste-
roid. The allura end up adrift on an empty ship, unable to spell-
jam, looking for new victims.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Groups of allura stay together for their entire
lives. Legends of the spaceways say that they are immortal, al-
ways trying to create higher levels of danger for their crews, to
garner stronger emotions to feed on, to find new experiences.

Ecology: If the allura don’t feed on new emotions every four
months, their appearance degenerates, revealing their true reptil-
ian form. While in this state, they hide when a ship comes into
their range and provoke their first victim into fighting a fellow
crew member. Using these emotions to regenerate, they regain
their beauty in 2d4 rounds.

 

 

 
Aperusa

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any
FREQUENCY: Common
ORGANIZATION: Clan
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: E(O, V)
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral (good)
NO. APPEARING: 5-50
ARMOR CLASS: 6
MOVEMENT: 12
HIT DICE: 1+1
THACO: 19
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: By weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 10%
SIZE: M (5-6' tall)
MORALE: Steady (11)
XP VALUE: 175

Sword: 975

Umbra: 975

Clan leader: 3,000

The Aperusa are wildspace gypsies. They are a swarthy, nimble,
handsome folk who dress in colorful silks and lots of jewelry. For
all intents and purposes, they act like groundling gypsies, though
no one knows whether the Aperusa are groundling gypsies who
somehow made it into space, or spacefarers who met gypsies and
chose to imitate them. Like other gypsies, the Aperusa are silent
about their origins, and they resent intrusions into their pasts.
This fanatical concealment of their past overrides even their love
for money and “stuff.”

These fun-loving folk wander wildspace in brightly painted,
slapdash spelljammers. The Aperusa salvage wrecks, run confi-
dence games, engage in petty thievery, and tell fortunes. They
speak their own secret tongue, as well as Thieves’ Cant and Com-
mon,

Combat: Treat most Aperusa as 1st-level thieves, their thief skills
modified by appropriate Dexterity bonuses.

Any Aperusa quickly points out that they are lovers, not fight-
ers. They pursue wealth and fun, not combat and its result, pain.
They gladly let others fight their battles for them; in fact, the
Aperusa reward their benefactors by selling them healing
balms—at bargain prices!

If combat is inevitable, the Aperusa try to delay fighting until
they get the advantage. They defend themselves with short
swords and main-gauches (40%), daggers and slings (30%), ra-
piers (20%), or longswords (10%). They wear no armor, trusting
their tough skin and high Dexterities. Some (20%) wear protec-
tion rings and cloaks, or bracers of defense.

Every Aperusa can feign death once per day, usually after tak-
ing a small flesh wound, or falling and pretending to hit his head.
After the foe leaves the fight, the Aperusa plot a rematch, making
sure the assailants won't know what hit them.

Aperusa are slightly magic-resistant and 75% immune to all de-
tection spells. Their minds cannot be read, and they cannot have
psionic abilities. Furthermore, due to their hearty nature and con-
stant exposure to wildspace, Aperusa have learned to use very lit-
tle air. Their bodies retain enough air to let them breathe for 2d10
days.

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Aperusa, not aggressive overall, give the re-
sponsibility of fighting and spying to two groups.

The first, Blades, are accomplished warriors, with saving
throws and abilities of 5th-level fighters, along with the normal
Aperusa thieving skills (also 5th-level). In addition, Blades can
cast spells as a 5th-level bard. Thus Blades can power the helm of
a spelljammer. Blades are responsible for strategy and tactics for
their clans. Only males can be Blades.

The second group, the Umbra, are spies who infiltrate other
races to gather information, scout, and (rarely) assassinate a
powerful enemy. Umbra are 5th-level thieves and have the spell
abilities of a Sth-level bard. Males and females can be Umbra. In
rare cases, some races hire Umbra to carry out spy missions. The
Umbra usually cannot resist pilfering a few things for themselves,
and they usually get caught.

Clans: For every 10 Aperusa there are two Blades and one Um-
bra. (Blades and Umbras look like normal Aperusa.) Twenty or
more adult Aparusa make up a familial clan, led by a matriarch
or patriarch (or both) of 10th level—the eldest male and his wife.
The clan includes 2d6 children who have the skills of 1st-level
thieves, the first skills taught to them. Aperusan clan surnames
have a distinctly wildspace flavor. The best known clans are the
Wildjammers, Phlogestos, and the Astralusians.

Clan leaders, called Beloved Grandfather and Beloved Grand-
mother, are either Blades or Umbras, with appropriate abilities at
10th level. A leader usually has at least one protective magical
item, often a symbol of authority. Clan leaders do not enter com-
bat, though in direst emergencies they can summon a constellate
(q.v.) once per year to fight for their clans. The leader perma-
nently loses 1 hp for each summoning.

If the Grandfather dies, his widow rules the clan, but she may
never remarry. If the Grandmother dies instead, the Grandfather
may remarry. Aperusans are monogamous.

Culture: Aperusan culture is thoroughly sexist. Males, consid-
ered the brains and brawn of the clan, make all decisions, enjoy
the most freedom, and take the best loot found. Females, besides
Aperusa

bearing children, doing domestic duties, and tending the sick and
wounded, serve the clan in “glamorous” roles like fortunetellers,
bait for scam victims, and dancers.

Truly motivated women can become Umbras, though such
women still must obey orders from any adult male. Males view
non-Aperusan women no better. They especially enjoy taking ad-
vantage of women who think the gypsy life “romantic.”

The Aperusa have no single faith; rather, in an effort not to of-
fend or slight any patron whose good graces may someday be
needed, they worship whoever seems most impressive at the mo-
ment. If an Aperusa is healed by a cleric of Ptah, for instance, the
whole clan will be impressed and undergo a mass conversion. Ev-
eryone sings and chants to Ptah, wears Ptah’s symbols, and
swears eternal loyalty to Ptah. This lasts until a cleric of another
patron performs a similar feat the following week, whereupon the
Aperusa undergo mass conversion and swear to follow the new
patron until the end of time.

Aperusa clans excel at making loaded dice, decks of cards (nor-
mal and marked), and small melee weapons such as daggers,
knives, darts, and mains-gauche.

Ecology: The Aperusa help keep wildspace tidy, because they
wander space collecting salvage. They are notorious packrats, for
they never know what debris may be in demand.

Inquiries about an Aperusan homeworld are usually greeted
with, “What's a homeworld?” Still, some scholars and shamefully
optimistic adventurers insist the homeworld exists and is clut-
tered with treasures that all Aperusa clans give as tribute to the
sovereign “King and Queen of the Aperusa.”

Proponents of the homeworld theory each point to one solid
piece of evidence: star maps that show the location of the
Aperusa homeworld. Of course, the maps were bought from the
Aperusa. Of course, no two maps are alike. Of course.

Relations With Other Races

Because of the Aperusa’s troublemaking, many other races do
not get along with them. The Aperusa act blissfully unaware of
this enmity, wonder what all the fuss is about, feign an innocent
air, and languidly dismiss tales of Aperusa cunning and trickery.
Their most quoted expression is “Who, us?”

The dohwar (q.v.) hate the Aperusa, for the gypsies are im-
mune to the dohwar's mind-reading abilities. Even worse, the
Aperusa are flooding the market with their own cheap goods and
services, offering more competition to the dohwar, who are al-
ready exhausted trying to keep up with the Arcane. Thus most
dohwar, in sheer frustration, lash out at the Aperusa or run them
over with a space swine (q.v.).

Aperusa adore the reigar. Though the feelings are not mutual,
the reigar do not dislike the Aperusa, preferring to judge them on
an individual basis. The Giff tolerate the gypsies, who hire them
often. Only the Arcane truly frighten the Aperusa; the Arcane are
just too strange for their taste. On the other hand, the Arcane
have no qualms about dealing with the Aperusa.

Tinker gnomes and the Aperusa like each other. Lots of trading
goes on at their rioutous parties, since the gnomes love the slap-
dash Vagabond ships (see below), and the gypsies enjoy gnomish
inventions.

 

Aperusan Characters

Aperusan characteristics are generated as humans, but Dexter-
ity, Constitution, and Charisma must be at least 15.

Adult male Aperusans usually have the Land-riding, Gaming,
Appraisal, and Tumbling non-weapon proficiencies. Females usu-
ally have Cooking, Dancing, Fortunetelling, and Healing. Blades
have Blind-fighting, Endurance, Running, and Weaponsmithing.
Umbras have Disguise, Read Lips, Information Gathering, and
Observation. Beloved Grandmothers learn Herbalism, Astrol-
ogy, and Spellcraft.

Clan members are fiercely loyal, first to their nuclear family,
then to their clan, and finally to their race. Though not usually lit-
erate, the Aperusa have their oral history and traditions. Like
true salvage experts, they borrow and incorporate and pieces of
other cultures.

Though unpredictable, the Aperusa almost never hurt anyone
unless they are hurt first. But vendettas against particularly harsh
enemies are not unheard of. Aperusa have long memories. Still,
the Aperusa are content to wander the stars, collecting the living
that they feel that the multiverse owes them. Even so, their thefts
and con games are small operations. Since they know what it is to
lack things at times, Aperusa do not pull scams on poor, starving
folk. Unfortunately, not many sailors of wildspace are poor, so
the gypsies have no qualms about robbing or swindling spell-
jammers.

The Aperusa Vagabond

Built by: Aperusa Armor Rating: 7

Used primarily by: Aperusa Saves as: Thick wood
Tonnage: 30tons Power Type: Minor helm
Hull Points: 30 Ship’s Rating: 5

Crew: 10/40 Standard Armament: None
Maneuver. Class: E Cargo: 15 tons
Landing—Land: Yes Keel Length: 90’
Landing—Water: No Beam Length: 20°

The Vagabond is an assorted collection of parts from other ves-
sels, usually attached to a wooden hull. The ships are asymmetri-
cal nightmares, but they work. Vagabonds are painted in bright,
clashing colors, with multi-colored banners hanging from masts
that seem to have no apparent function. They are unarmed. Each
clan has its own ship, though some large clans require two or
more ships.

 

 

 

 

 
Autognome

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Nil
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Semi- (4)
TREASURE: Special
ALIGNMENT: Neutral good
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 0
MOVEMENT: 5, Fl 6 (E), Sw 3, Br 4
HIT DICE: S+5
THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 or special
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d10/1d10 or special
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: S (3" tall)
MORALE: Fearless (19)
XP VALUE: 975

An autognome is a mechanical gnome with gears, pulleys, and
bits of magic inside it. The tinker gnomes create the autognome
for exploration, rescue, prospecting, and defense in environ-
ments hostile to human- and demihumankind. It works just as
well as any other gnomish invention.

These automatons resemble gnomes, though no one could ever
confuse an autognome with a real gnome. Autognome faces are
painted, even down to red circles on their cheeks. They walk with
a stiff gait, clanking, wheezing, whirring, and razzing, their arms
swinging out of rhythm. Autognomes speak gnomish and Com-
mon in a nasal monotone.

Autognomes are either directed, under the gnomes’ control; or
rogues, which have forgotten their orders and now wander wild-
space doing anything except what they were designed for.

Combat: Autognomes obey the following directives: (1) defend
gnomes under attack by non-gnomes; (2) defend yourself against
attack; and (3) defend babies and children from harm. The last di-
rective arose from the best intentions, but unfortunately, it ne-
glects to specify races; so if, for instance, an autognome sees elves
battling young beholders, the autognome blasts away at the
elves.

Autognomes attack with two heavy metallic fists, doing 1d10
damage each. Unfortunately, autognomes are slow and always
attack last in a round when using their fists.

Since one of their functions is to collect soil samples from dif-
ferent planets, most autognomes (90%) have a retractable metal
scoop. If the scoop is used as a weapon (only when the
autognome malfunctions), it inflicts 1d12 damage.

Some autognomes (33%) are used exclusively for combat, and
have a wand of lightning set in their chests. These wands have
5d10 charges remaining and are salvageable after the autognome
is defeated or (more likely) when it breaks down and collapses
into a useless heap.

Whichever attack form the autognome uses, it yells as it fights:
“Crush! Kill! Destroy! Exterminate, exterminate! Maim! Hurt!
Incapacitate!”

Autognomes save as hard metal. They are immune to poison
and all spells except disintegrate.

Malfunctions: Every successful hit on an autognome has a 10%
chance of causing a malfunction. Any time an autognome rolls a
1 for its attack roll, it has a 25% chance of malfunctioning. Fi-

 

 

 

 

nally, an autognome has a 5% non-cumulative chance per day to
malfunction. Whatever the cause, roll 1d12 and consult the fol-
lowing table:

Autognome Malfunction Table

1-2. Autognome becomes a rogue (if already a rogue, use #10)
3. Autognome attacks itself for 1d4 rounds
4-5. Head or limb falls off (20% chance for each appendage)
6-7. As 4-5, but the autognome spends one round reattaching the
lost limb
8-9, Autognome attempts to extract a core sample from victim
10. Autognome shuts down for 1d10 hours
11. Autognome explodes (3d10 damage in a 20’ radius; save vs.
breath weapon for half damage)
12. Autognome’s orders change. Roll 1d6:
A. Self-destruct sequence starts. Autognome explodes in
1d4 rounds unless doused with water
B. Autognome gives its report
C. Autognome asks to record report, and remains station-
ary until the PC stops talking
D. Autognome begins talking backwards
E. Nearest PC is recognized as a baby
F. Nearest PC is recognized as a gnome; autognome follows
PC around

Habitat/Society: Since autognomes are automatons, they have no
society or preferred habitat. A gnomish spelljammer has a 10%
chance of having 1d4 autognomes on board to explore hostile en-
vironments.

Autognomes can follow up to 100 different orders, including
what to do in certain situations, or what minerals to look for ona
planet. An autognome can memorize and recite everything it sees
and hears in a 24-hour period.

An autognome can converse with others, but its thought proc-
esses are inflexible, and it does not deviate from its orders. Figures
Autognome

of speech are lost on it. Autognome logic is narrow. For instance,
an autognome may be ordered to fetch a rock sample. In its trav-
els, it meets a human warrior named Rok. Therefore, out comes
the sample scoop and...

There is a 1/3 chance that an encountered autognome is a rogue.
It has forgotten its orders and is now in one of the following con-
ditions (roll 1d4):

1) The autognome believes itself to be a real gnome, and tries to
live a normal life, including eating, sleeping, etc.

2) The autognome awaits new orders from anyone it meets.

3) Same as #2, except it does the opposite of what is it told.

4) The autognome attacks all living creatures in sight.

The gnomes guard the secret of building autognomes jealously,
though no one but gnomes wants to build the things. It is rumored
that it requires many spells such as enchant an item, animate ob-
ject, and permanency, and it costs at least 10,000 gp.

For some reason, the dohwar are interested in purchasing in-
tact, working autognomes. All other intelligent races either flee
the things or, if the autognome is unaccompanied by a gnome,
blow it up.

Ecology: Autognomes contribute nothing to the ecosystem except
for piles of scrap metal when they inevitably break down. Rogue
types can be a wildspace hazard.

 

 

 

 

 
Bionoid

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: All

FREQUENCY: Very Rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Average to Exceptional (8-16)

TREASURE: Special

ALIGNMENT: Neutral good

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: -3

MOVEMENT: 48

HIT DICE: 12

THACO: 9

NO. OF ATTACKS: 6

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d8(x2), 1d10(x2), 2d8(x2)

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Vorpal attacks, energy blast,
crush

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: L (9-11' tall)

MORALE: Elite (13-14)

XP VALUE: 6,000 each

Bionoids are chitinous, bipedal humanoid insects with a glowing
circular gem in the center of their forehead. Though their appear-
ance strikes fear in those who view them, their demeanor belies
their looks. They originated as “Living Weapons” during the Un-
human Wars.

In their combat form, also called their monster form, they are
tall, muscular creatures with iridescent exoskeletons, Hard claw-
like blades protrude from both forearms and the head. In addi-
tion to the standard pair of compound eyes, they possess four
secondary eyes that can move independently like those of a cha-
meleon. Pebbly, metallic-looking muscle fibers are visible at the
joints.

In their humanoid form, bionoids are thin, well-muscled, and
fairly tall. They have uniformly calm, even tempers, and are of-
ten contemplative. They move with great economy; useless ges-
tures or movements are very rare.

Combat: In battle, the bionoids’ true nature becomes apparent.
They make two slashing attacks with their forearm blades for
1d10 points of damage apiece, along with spiked fists that strike
for 1d8. Similarly, the bionoid’s feet have a heel spur that does
2d8 points of damage in a kick or stomp attack. It can make two
kicks per round. The bionoid’s chitinous plates and its agility give
t AC =3.

Due to their high speed, bionoids usually use their fists, fore-
arms and feet in combination with a leaping attack that brings
them immediately into close striking range. In close combat with
large opponents, the bionoid also crushes the opponent in its
arms for an additional 2d8 points of damage. This damage con-
tinues on each round the opponent is crushed.

The bionoids’ specialized halberds do 1d12 points of damage
(plus strength bonuses of +6); only bionoids can wield them.
These weapons, pointed with blades at each end, can attack a sin-
gle target three times per round. The bionoids’ speed, agility and
expertise with these traditional specialty weapons make them a
most feared opponent.

The bionoid’s most powerful weapon is a spell-like effect simi-
lar to the third level fireball spell. The bionoid opens up the twin
dorsal plates on its chest, exposing two highly charged mem-
branes. Opening these chest plates causes 2d4 points of damage to

 

 

 

 

 

the bionoid itself, while causing damage as a 6th-level fireball
spell in a 30’ cone shape. The damage to the bionoid means this
attack is a last resort. The warrior must rest for a full day after
such a discharge before using it again.

The crystal eye on its forehead is the bionoid’s weak point. The
eye remains in the center of the bionoid's forehead when in
monster-form, but is hidden inside the skull in human form. Re-
moval of the crystal eye results in the bionoid’s immediate de-
composition. The crystal eye traps its master’s essence to wait for
regeneration. If a direct crushing blow shatters the eye, irrevoca-
ble death for eye and bionoid ensues.

Habitat/Society: Bionoids were originally tailored as troops in the
Unhuman Wars. Volunteer elves gave themselves to be altered
into organic fighting machines. After the Wars, they were cast out
into the cosmos, to make their own way far from the sight of the
elves. Years of ostracism, of living apart from the rest of elvish so-
ciety like plague victims, has instilled in them a deep distrust of all
other elven races.

Although these bionoids were instilled with an instinctive urge
for combat without quarter, they are essentially good beings who
constantly strive to control the powers of their implanted nature.

Though they travel nearly everywhere in wildspace, bionoids
prefer to remain alone. Many work as crew members on spelljam-
ming ships across the flow, or they reside in country manors or
castles. Still others live as hermits on lonely asteroids far from the
normal spelljamming trade routes. In some cases, elvish com-
munities sympathetic to the bionoids’ situation have taken in in-
dividual bionoids.

Though rare, a bionoid family can comprise hundreds of mem-
bers, always led by the individual who started the unit, either the
original bionoid or its full-blooded descendants, Bionoid symbi-
onts are welcome to join the unit, but must vow to avoid (and
avoid infecting) residents of the outside world.

Though engineered for warfare, the family unit sustains itself
primarily through farming. They practice battle skills primarily
Bionoid

as a spiritual discipline. Most frontier cities and spelljamming
outposts welcome bionoid communities.

Ecology: Even bionoid reproduction is invasive. The eggs of ma-
ture bionoids are disc-shaped with a single crystalline “trigger” in
the center. This crystal serves a multiple purpose: it is an attract-
ant to potential victims since it makes the egg look like a magical
item, and it is also the young bionoid’s eye. When a potential host
touches the crystal eye, the host's essence marks the egg. The egg
bursts, attaches to the host, and grows as a symbiont, eventually
separating and becoming a separate, nymph bionoid.

If an orc touches the egg, the egg explodes in a mass of corro-
sive filaments causing immediate death. A successful saving
throw versus spell causes 2d12 hit points of corrosive damage. If
half-orcs make their saving throws, the half-orc and the bionoid
bind in symbiosis. Evil beings can fuse with the bionoid, but suf-
fer the penalties of radical change to the bionoid’s good align-
ment.

If elves, humans or other humanoid races touch the egg, it infil-
trates the victim, creating another adult bionoid. The new
bionoid has the abilities described above, but appears only when
danger threatens, whereupon the host “monsters out” into the
bionoid monster form. In addition, the symbiosis gives the host a
natural AC of 7. But the host should only wear normal, easily re-
placeable clothing, due to the unpredictable nature of his malady!

The crystal eye's AC is 0, it has 45 hit points, and it is worth
around 10,000 gp—but woe betide the buyer! In the crystal eye is
the essence of the original owner. If presented with a living body,
the crystal reduces and restructures that body in favor of its
stored master, resulting in death (of a sort) for the purchaser.

 

 

 

 

 
Bloodsac

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Wildspace
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Swarm
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Blood
INTELLIGENCE: Semi- (3)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 3-12
ARMOR CLASS: 6
MOVEMENT: 3, Fi1s(C)
HIT DICE: 4+4
THACO: 16

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2d10
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Surprise
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: S (4' diameter)
MORALE: Very steady (14)
XP VALUE: 420

Bloodsacs (technically known as “haagathga”) are blob-like
bloodsuckers that silently glide through wildspace looking for
blood. This usually means spelljamming ships, with their comple-
ments of warm-blooded sailors.

These space-borne horrors are shapeless, pulsating sacks of
fluid in a slightly translucent black-blue membrane. This mem-
brane is covered by tiny, razor-rimmed suckers, each with tiny
speck of silver or yellow coloring. Bloodsacs resembles a patch of
bying night sky. The familiar smell of blood wafts about their
bodies.

Bloodsacs travel in packs, using their natural camouflage to
swoop down on unsuspecting ships, surprising the crews, and
draining their blood. The beasts are sometimes called “star vam-
pires.” They have no speech.

Combat: Bloodsacs move silently through space using infravision
to detect warm-blooded victims. They glide noiselessly onto the
deck of a spelljamming vessel, probably one in orbit around a
planet, and try to surprise sailors on deck. Due to the creatures’
coloration, foes suffer a —2 penalty to surprise rolls. Guards
have a 1% chance per point of Intelligence or Wisdom (whichever
is higher) to spot the swarm. Guards only get one chance to spot
the bloodsacs before the monsters attack.

If at all possible, bloodsacs attack from behind, gaining a +2 to
their attack rolls.

Once a victim is hit, the bloodsac’s tiny suckers bore into the
skin and begin sucking out the blood, causing 2d10 damage.
Once attached, a bloodsac does not let go until pulled off, or until
it drains the victim completely. Pulling off a bloodsac requires a
Strength ability check. If the beast comes off, the victim takes an
additional 1d10 points of damage as the blob’s suckers tear out of
the victim's flesh. If the blob remains attached, it automatically
does 2d10 points of damage each round (no attack roll needed).
As the bloodsac drains blood from its victim, its color changes
from dark blue to a sickly violet.

After draining a victim, the bloodsac sprouts a tube and at-
taches it to the base of the victim's skull. Through this tube the
blob drains out the victim's brain fluids. This process takes one
round, after which the bloodsac flies away, sated—for now.

 

 

 

 

 

The fluid it collects contains the victim's memories and knowl-
edge. Thus, victims raised from the dead have no memory of their
identities and, though they have full hit points, are effectively 0-
level characters in skills, THACO, saving throws, and proficien-
cies. All memories are lost. Victims still retain basic skills needed
to take care of everyday needs, as well as the ability to speak one
language (most likely Common).

A spell such as restoration or a wish can restore lost memory;
so can catching the bloodsac who drained the fluid and pouring it
over the victim before he is raised from the dead.

Habitat/Society: Bloodsac swarms have no leader. They merely
follow whomever has homed in on food. They wander wildspace,
never sleeping, never setting up a lair nor landing on a planet.
Bloodsacs hate gravity, for their bodies collapse into sluggish
heaps of protoplasm.

Ecology: Bloodsacs are parasitic predators, greatly feared by
warm-blooded beings of all alignments and races. They repro-
duce by laying a clutch of 6d6 eggs inside a victim who has been
completely drained of blood. For each bloodsac that has killed a
victim, there is a 50% chance that it was a female and has laid
eggs in the victim's body. The eggs hatch 2dé6 days later, bursting
the body asunder and releasing the voraciously hungry bloodsac
young (1 HD each, 1d8 blood drain damage per round).

Mind flayers take an interest in the bloodsacs, especially with
the blobs’ ability to drain brain fluids. Some mind flayers keep
trained bloodsacs, a particularly deadly combination.
Buzzjewel

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Wildspace
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Swarm
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Gems
INTELLIGENCE: Animal (1)
TREASURE: Special
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 10-60
ARMOR CLASS: =3
MOVEMENT: 3, Fl 24 (A)
HIT DICE: 1+1
THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d8 + poison
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Poison
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 45%

SIZE: T (6" long)
MORALE: Unreliable (2)
XP VALUE: 650

Buzzjewels are inoffensive insects native to wildspace. They
travel through space in beautiful multi-colored swarms. They are
attracted to light sources, much like moths. Sailors can always
tell when a swarm of buzzjewels approaches, due to the loud
droning noise from the insects’ wings and the cloud of multi-
colored light reflected from their bodies.

Buzzjewel bodies are partly gemstones, with opaque coloration
ranging from ruby red to emerald green to aquamarine blue.
When a buzzjewel dies or is killed, its organic body shrivels away,
leaving a small ornamental gemstone of 5 gp value, the remnants
of the mineral meals it consumed. One buzzjewel in a thousand
produces a fancy, precious, or gem/jewel gemstone.

Like other insects, buzzjewel bodies have three segments: the
head, thorax, and abdomen. Buzzjewel eyes are multifaceted and
quite sensitive to light. Each buzzjewel has two pairs of translu-
cent wings similar to the dragonfly's, and three pairs of legs,
which it draws close to its body during flight.

Combat: Though buzzjewels swarm around light sources, they
are timid around living creatures. Not easily angered, a swarm of
buzzjewels passively tolerates 1d4 rounds of attack. After this the
buzzjewel swarm, finally infuriated, attacks the offender and ev-
eryone else in sight.

All buzzjewels have tiny sharp teeth. Since buzzjewels have no
taste for living flesh, they bite, then quickly let go. They attack in
swarms of 10 or 20 against one opponent (10 vs. halflings,
dwarves, and other small opponents). A single attack roll deter-
mining the swarm’s chance to hit. The swarm overwhelms its vic-
tims; thus, the defenders get no Dexterity bonus to AC.

Each swarm of 10 buzzjewels causes 1d8 damage. For each
point of damage the swarm does, there is a 10% chance that Type
N poison is injected into the wound. The poison’s onset time is
one round. A failed saving throw vs. poison inflicts 4d8 damage;
a successful save reduces this to 2d8 damage.

The buzzjewels’ magic resistance sometimes reflect spells back
at the caster. If the spell fails due to the insects’ magic resistance,
the spell is reflected back at the caster. If the spell fails because the
buzzjewels saved against it, they don’t reflect the spell.

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Buzzjewels live in tiny honeycombed passages
just under the surface of asteroids. They instinctively avoid
worlds with humanoid populations. Buzzjewels do not require air
to survive.

As a rule, buzzjewels live on asteroids high in gemstone con-
tent. Gems are their chief source of food, though the insects can
eat any mineral or rock if pressed. Interestingly, pearls are poi-
sonous to buzzjewels. A poisoned buzzjewel turns black and does
not become a valuable gem.

Buzzjewels communicate by body movements, as bees do.
When a buzzjewel swarm finds a new source of gems, it returns to
its old lair and does a dance that tells the swarm where the new
strike is. Dwarven sages have long tried to decipher the dance so
they can obtain the gems, so far to no avail.

Buzzjewels can be called by various insect summoning spells; if
summoned, they behave as groundling insects. Note, however, if
the insects are summoned to be killed for their gems, the caster
loses control over them, and the enraged swarm attacks instantly.

Ecology: Buzzjewels contribute nothing to the ecosystem. In fact,
races that mine gemstones strongly dislike the little gem-eaters.
The gnomes call buzzjewels “gembane,” and the only printable
name that dwarves use is “baublebiters.”

Due to the unpredictable poisonous bite of the buzzjewels,
most wise folk resist the idea of catching the bugs and killing them
for their gems in a get-rich-quick scheme. The low value of the
dead bodies does not make it worth the risk.

The dohwar actually use live, caged buzzjewels as currency,
much to the horror of some of other civilized races. It is rumored
that the dohwar are also experimenting with buzzjewels, feeding
them fancy gems to see whether, once a buzzjewel dies, it leaves
behind a more valuable gem.

 

 
Constellate

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Wildspace
FREQUENCY: Common
ORGANIZATION: Constellation
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: None
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: None
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: ol et |
MOVEMENT: Variable

HIT DICE: N/A
THACO: 2

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: See below
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: G (1 to 100 million square miles)
MORALE: Fearless (19-20)
XP VALUE: N/A

The peaceful constellates are made of small motes of light gath-
ered in constellations, groupings of stars that suggest various ob-
jects and life forms. Surrounding each constellation is the ghostly
image of the thing it represents—the constellate proper. These
ghostly images depict wolves, swords, warriors, and the like.

Individual stars’ colors vary, but most are bluish-white. Their
color may relate to their age. No single star has ever separated
from its constellate group.

Combat: Constellates choose to avoid battle when possible. Gen-
erally they fly away from danger (playing hob with astronomers
in the process!). After the danger has passed, the constellate re-
turns to its position.

When an Aperusa (q.v.) clan leader summons a constellate, its
nature changes radically. Witnesses see an immense shadowy fig-
ure shaped like the constellation drop down from the heavens.
The stars diffuse and move randomly within the constellate’s
body. It can change size at will, usually to maintain its size rela-
tive to the viewers; for instance, the Panther constellate seems to
remain panther-sized whether in the sky or on a ship's deck.

The constellate gains the special abilities of the character or ob-
ject it portrays: e.g., the Swan could use wing buffets, and the
Krynnspace constellation Raistlin-Fistandantilus could use time-
stop

If it wishes, the constellate can melee at up to its full size—often
millions of square miles! The full-size constellate can crush with
its enormous bulk, causing 2d20 points of damage per 1,000
square miles of area. The range of this attack is the constellate’s
size. It can use this attack form once every other round. It can
also throw bolts of energy (called sunbolts) with unerring accu-
racy. Sunbolts cause 2d12 points of damage for every 1,000
square miles of the constellate’s area. The range of the sunbolts is
believed to be 500,000 miles. Damage does not decrease over dis-
tance; however, accuracy does decrease. At short range (1-
125,000 miles) there is no penalty to the attack roll; medium
range (125,001-250,000 miles) takes a —2 penalty; and long range
(250,001-500,000 miles) takes a —5 penalty. The constellate can
use this attack once per round, even while it uses its crushing
blow.

 

The sunbolt is a cone-shaped area 1,000 miles in diameter.
When this area of effect is added to the strength of the sunbolt,
the constellate can literally crush planets at its whim. Some be-
lieve that the Grinder asteroid belt within the heavens of Grey-
space is actually the residue of a summoned constellate’s attack.
Legends speak of constellates who inflicted great harm against a
planet within that crystal sphere. The gods retaliated against
these constellates, thereby banning them from the crystal sphere.
The constellates’ whereabouts are unknown.

A constellate’s attack lasts only five rounds. There are no re-
ports of an attack lasting longer that this. It then resumes its place
in the sky and its former nature. A given constellate can only be
summoned once a year.

Habitat/Society: Each constellation in a sphere's night sky is a
constellate. They occupy their assigned positions, swapping
choice information about the goings-on of the groundling races or
lamenting their eternal celestial imprisonment. The advent of
spelljamming ships has created new gossip for these beings, and
their overall morale has risen.

Although they converse freely among themselves through te-
lepathy, they never speak to corporeal life forms. Attempts to im-
prison and interrogate constellates fail, for they simply change
size to escape from their prison.

Ecology: Sages dispute the true genesis of the constellates. Some
postulate that they have existed as long as the stars in the sky.
Others point to Krynnspace, where new constellations appeared
and old ones disappeared in the War of the Lance. Still others talk
of the influence of divine entities.

Why the Aperusa have an affinity with the constellates is an
equally tantalizing mystery. They have never divulged their spells
of summoning, and with the constellates as allies, it is unlikely
that anyone will wrest the secret from the wildspace gypsies.
Contemplator

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Asteroid
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: None
INTELLIGENCE: Godlike (21)
TREASURE: H
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 0
MOVEMENT: 24

HIT DICE: 13+1
THACO: 7

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 (5)
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2d10/2d10/2d10 (2d8/2d8)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Spell
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 50%

SIZE: L (12')
MORALE: Fanatic (18)
XP VALUE: 13000

Contemplators live on barren asteroids, pondering the ques-
tions of the universe. Some say that when one discovers all the
answers to all the questions, the universe will end.

A contemplator is found most often seated in the classical
thinker pose on a large stone outcropping. A gray humanoid, 12’
tall, he often wears a gray toga. Consequently, unwary adventur-
ers may easily mistake him for a statue.

Combat: A contemplator yearns for all knowledge and has de-
duced that the best way to gather it is directly from the minds of
other beings. To gather information, he captures any intelligent
being who lands on or comes near his asteroid.

The contemplator creates three arms out of the asteroid’s sur-
face to capture his specimens. Each arm can extend 50’ and has 25
hit points. If an arm is destroyed, the contemplator can create an-
other after 24 hours have passed.

If forced into a fight personally, the contemplator punches with
his own two arms (inflicting 2d8 points of damage with each) as
well as with his three extra appendages.

When a contemplator captures a victim with one of the three
large arms, he encases its body in a thin (1/4" thick) layer of stone
and drains its Intelligence, one point a day. This requires the con-
templator’s uninterrupted concentration. If he is disturbed at any
time, that day's point of Intelligence remains with the captured
character (at least for one more day). Each day, the entombed vic-
tim can attempt a Bend Bars/Lift Gates role to escape the stone
prison. When the victim’s Intelligence is reduced to 3, the contem-
plator’s stone arm flings the now-useless simpleton into space.

If a wish or similar magic restores a character's Intelligence, the
knowledge restored vanishes from the contemplator who stole it.
If this restored character ever comes within 50 miles of the con-
templator who lost the knowledge, the contemplator immedi-
ately detects, intercepts, and attacks the character. A
contemplator cannot tolerate knowing something and then hav-
ing it taken away!

 

A contemplator who drains a wizard gains all the wizard’s
memorized spells. He casts these acquired spells only once, for he
won't waste the time necessary to write them down. He can only
use wizard spells, not those of priests. A contemplator still must
use material components for spells that require them.

Habitat/Society: The contemplator spends all of his time on his
asteroid sifting through his acquired knowledge, searching for
any clue to the origin and end of the universe. He is totally devoid
of emotion, but he is usually willing to negotiate for a captive's
life. The price is often a quest for information, such as the answer
to a question. The contemplator always sets a time limit on the
quest and, once the deal is made, never reneges or renegotiates.

A contemplator can move his asteroid through space using a
mysterious form of locomotion. He is usually content to drift
through space, but when the need arises, he can move quickly in
any direction.

Acontemplator knows of any change on the surface of his aste-
roid, as though it were an extension of his body. This makes
stealthy approach impossible except by flight.

Ecology: Strewn about the contemplator’s asteroid are the mate-
rial remains of his past conflicts. When he tosses his victims into
wildspace, the contemplator keeps their possessions, primarily
for his experiments with newfound spells. He still needs the com-
ponents to make them work correctly.

 

 

 
Dohwar

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any
FREQUENCY: Common
ORGANIZATION: Cartel
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average (10)
TREASURE: H (Z)
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 4-40 (90-180)
ARMOR CLASS: 5
MOVEMENT: 3, Sw 9

HIT DICE: 3

THACO: 18

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: S (4' tall)
MORALE: Irregular (7)
XP VALUE:

3 HD Salesman: 65

4 HD Merchant: 120

5 HD Protector: 175

6 HD Manager: 270

7 HD Executive Board Member: 420
9 HD President: 1400

The dohwar are short, pudgy, flightless avians bearing a passing
resemblance to penguins. They are shameless merchants, always
looking for an opportunity to turn a profit. Since the Arcane
(otherwise knows as “Our Competitors”) are considered the
greatest merchants of wildspace, the dohwar try harder to dis-
place them.

The average dohwar stands 4’ tall. Black feathers cover most of
its body, except for its chest, covered in white feathers. The
dohwar has two wings that are useless for flight but have limited
prehensile action, allowing it to grasp objects. Dohwar do not
walk, they waddle. Their mode of dress is a garish mishmash of
clashing clothes that would make an Aperusa blush. Amazingly,
the dohwar have figured out that groundling civilizations may be
disconcerted by their avian appearance. On these planets, the
dohwar wear heavy hoods and cloaks and try to pass for short
people.

Though the dohwar speak Common and their own tongue,
they rely heavily on telepathic powers for communication among
themselves. In fact, dohwar have pairings called “mergers,”
wherein two dohwar stay in mental rapport, even to the point of
finishing each other's sentences. This drives other races crazy.

Combat: Asa race, the dohwar are not fighters. They rely on oth-
ers to do their fighting for them. Their philosophy towards com-
bat is to tell their hired muscle, “Here's 500 more gold pieces.
Keep attacking.” Dohwar often hire Giff mercenaries.

The dohwar, with amazing foresight and awareness of harsh
reality, know they cannot always depend on handy mercenaries.
Thus they have Protectors, dohwars that are actually trained to
fight. Protectors wield the “weega,” a sword blade that fits over
the dohwar’'s beak. This turns an otherwise ineffectual peck into a
powerful sword thrust doing 1d6 damage to small and man-sized
targets and 1d8 to larger victims.

Some Protectors ride space swine (q.v.), the winged pigs of the
dohwar. The dohwar have even organized an elite air cavalry
called the Deathsquealers. This cavalry is organized into squads

 

 

 

 

 

of four Deathsquealer riders each. Besides the weega, riders carry
light lances. Deathsquealers have the non-weapon proficiencies
of land-based Riding, aerial Riding, Blindfighting, and Tumbling.

Only Protectors wear armor. They prefer bulky plate armor
but carry no shields. The only drawback of the armor is its clum-
siness; armored dohwar attack last in a combat round. Against
all logic, even Deathsquealers wear this heavy, unwieldy armor.
Fortunately, no similar suit exists for the space swine.

All dohwar have fangs, which they developed over the centu-
ries to eat tough, exotic plants found on the many worlds of wild-
space. These fangs, a last desperate defensive measure, do 1d2
damage.

The fangs are the only weapon that all non-Protector dohwar
have. Non-Protector dohwar do not carry weapons nor wear ar-
mor.

Habitat/Society: Manager dohwar have either wizard or priest
spells (50% chance each) and have reached 6th level. Managers
cannot be specialist mages. Managers act as the spelljammers on
merchant ships.

Executive Board members and Presidents have a similar spell
arrangement. Use the dohwar’s Hit Dice to determine its spellcast-
ing level (e.g., a President casts spells as a 9th-level spellcaster).
Spellcasters choose few combat spells and prefer defensive, divin-
atory, negotiation-enhancing, concealing, and especially healing
spells. Dohwar hate pain.

There is one Merchant for every four dohwar encountered, one
Manager for every 20, and one Executive Board member for
every 40. For every five conventional dohwar encountered, there
is one Protector. Rarely (5%) groups are composed entirely of
Protectors. If more than eight Protectors are encountered, they
are all Deathsquealers.

A “cartel” consists of 10d10+80 dohwar, plus 10d4 x10 chil-
dren. A cartel is run by a President, who is the final arbiter of all
matters.

Life-style: Though the dohwar can live anywhere, they prefer
Dohwar

arctic or sub-arctic climes near large bodies of water. They are
monogamous and mate for life in a union called a “merger.” The
female lays 1d4 eggs (“new wares”) annually, These mergers are
telepathic; mates are in constant mental communication to an ef-
fective range of 10 miles. If one partner is slain, the other goes
berserk, trying to kill everything in its path. The mental link takes
one turn to forge and one round to break.

The dohwar’s other mental power is ESP usable at will. A
dohwar must rest one turn for every round that the power is used.
Thus, if a dohwar activates its ESP for five turns of negotiations,
it must spend five hours resting, using no mental ability. A
dohwar can use mental powers for a maximum of two hours.

Dohwar eat fish, vegetables, and plankton. They are fond of
strong drink, and alcohol does not intoxicate them. Sweets, on
the other hand, are highly intoxicating; to a dohwar, one apple
has the effect of strong beer, and a few tablespoons of honey or
maple syrup get it blind drunk.

The dohwar worship powers associated with commerce,
profit, and wealth. The power’s race or alignment is unimportant.
Dohwar variously venerate Abbathor, the dwarven god of greed;
the Realms’ Waukeen, goddess of commerce; Krynn’s Shinare,
goddess of commerce; and Zilchus, Greyhawk’s god of business
and money. Though they love money, the dohwar are generous
with religious contributions. Some speculate that they see such
tithes as “cosmic investments,” with the powers in return giving
the dohwar a divine advantage in bargaining sessions.

Personality: Though the dohwar are chaotic neutral, this best
describes their behavior to other races. Among themselves, they
are surprisingly well organized and helpful. They feel (incor-
rectly) that the multiverse is out to get them, that everyone wants
to see them go broke. Thus, despite their lust for wealth, they
stick together and try not to sell each other short—at least not of-
ten.

The dohwar know few social skills, nor have they any interest
in learning. They are obnoxious, brash, persistent, money-
grubbing merchants. Their standard way to do business is by
pairing up against prospective customers and talking them into
submission. Clients face a pair of fanged penguins who talk non-
stop and finish each other's sentences. The merger recites a fast,
lengthy list of goods for sale, interspersed with offers to purchase
various objects on the client's person.

Dohwar wares are many and varied. Anything from the Play-
er's Handbook may show up in a dohwar ship's hold, even things
like wagons and small boats, as well as magical items, magical
weapons, spell components, books, scrolls, and potions. Gnom-
ish inventions also clutter many a dohwar ship. There is an 80%
chance to find any specific non-magical product on a dohwar
ship. For magical items, consult the Treasure Type stats.

Relations With Other Races

The rest of the multiverse consider the dohwar to be a major ir-
ritant and wish the dohwar would leave them alone. There is no
malice in this, just a fervent desire to be far removed from this ob-
noxious race.

The Arcane refuse even to acknowledge the existence of the *

dohwar, let alone consider them serious competition. If illithids
or beholders have any interest in dohwar, it is probably a clinical
interest involving vivisection. The neogi welcome relations with
the dohwar, since Great Old Masters need all the food they can
get, and dohwar have such juicy, tender flesh. Pirates of Gith en-
joy encountering the dohwar, since the ships are lightly armed
and laden with loot.

Elves and reigar avoid the dohwar and find them intolerable.
The reigar believe the birds “dress to make one ill;’ and consider
their waddling “an insult to the idea of graceful movement.”

The Aperusa and the Monitors are wary of the dohwar, the
former because the dohwar can out-talk them, the latter for the
chance to catch the dohwar at illegal business practices.

Tinker gnomes welcome the dohwar, who have many nice gad-
gets to sell that the gnomes love to take apart and put back to-
gether. The gnomes also like the dohwar’s vast stock of spare
parts and knick-knacks, all perfect for incorporating in gnomish
inventions. The dohwar also buy gnomish inventions and try to
sell them to others.

The Dohwar Uspo
Built by: Dohwar Armor Rating: 6
Used Primarily by: Dohwar Saves as: Thick wood
Tonnage: 40tons Power Type: Minor Helm
Hull Points: 40 Ship's Rating: 2
Crew: 20/60 Standard Armament: None
Maneuver. Class: E Cargo: 20 tons
Landing—Land: 75% Keel Length: 200’

likely
Landing—Sea: Yes Beam Length: 90'

The Uspo is shaped like a huge penguin lying on its stomach. Its
massive wings are movable, and they are deployed perpendicular
to the body during planet landings. The wings are supposed to
make the ship more maneuverable. This does not work.

Although the ship has no defenses, there is a 5% chance that
the Uspo is carrying 4d12 Deathsquealers, who fly out of the Us-
po’s main hatch (its “beak”) and engage any belligerents.

There is a 50% chance that the ship has 4d12 Giff mercenaries
on board as security.

Ecology: The dohwar do not contribute to nor disrupt the ecolog-
ical balance of wildspace.

There is a dohwar homeworld in the far reaches of wildspace,
an arctic planet teeming with millions of dohwar, all wheeling
and dealing. Thus far, no one has shown an interest in visiting or
even learning its location.

 

 

 
Dragon, Moon

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Moons
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary or clan
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Highly (13-14)
TREASURE: Special
ALIGNMENT: Variable

NO. APPEARING: 1 (1-3)
ARMOR CLASS: 4 (base)
MOVEMENT: 12, Fl 18 (C )
HIT DICE: 9 (base)
THACO: 12 (base)

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 +special
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4/1d4/2d10
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Special
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Variable
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Variable
SIZE: G (25' base)
MORALE: Elite (15)

Moon dragons are evil dragons that exclusively inhabit caves on
moons, Like most dragons, they prize wealth and power. The col-
oration of moon dragons changes every 30 days, starting out as
brilliant white. Slowly, what appears to be a large black shadow
forms on the dragon’s left side, and gradually moves across the
beast until it is all black. This process takes 15 days, whereupon a
small sliver of white appears on the left side and moves across the
dragon until, 15 days later, it is all white again. The dragon's
strength and alignment vary with its coloration. Each “phase”
lasts seven days. When the dragon is all black, it is at full strength
and chaotic evil. When either black-white or white-black, its
powers and combat modifiers are half the dragon's age category,
its alignment neutral evil. When all white, it is lawful evil and its
power is one quarter of its age category (e.g., an old dragon dur-
ing the all-white phase fights as a very young dragon). Size and
Intelligence do not change.

When the moon dragon is all white, lycanthropes immediately
change into were-form and, unless they save vs. magic, obey the
moon dragon's commands as though charmed.

Moon dragons speak the tongue common to all evil dragons,
and 20% of all hatchlings can speak with any living being, this
chance increasing 5% per age category.

Combat: The moon dragon dislikes lowering itself to mere com-
bat. If provoked, it leads with its breath weapon and hopes this
attack panics the enemy. If the dragon's opponents dare not flee,
the dragon breathes again, sometimes casting a spell or two “for
variety’s sake.” Moon dragons dislike using their claws and bite
(each 1d4), considering such brawling beneath them.

Moon dragons breathe a cone of black frost 160’ long, 40’ wide
at the base, and 10’ wide at the dragon's mouth. Besides causing

Breath
Age Body Lgt(') Tail Lgt(') AC Weapon
1 1-12 2-12 7 2d6 +1
2 13-24 13-20 6 3d6 +2
3 25-36 21-28 5 4d6 +3
4 37-48 29-36 4 5d6 +4
5 49-60 37-44 2 6d6 +5
6 61-72 45-52 2 7d6+6
7 73-84 53-60 1 8d6 +7
8 85-96 61-68 0 9d6 +8
9 97-108 69-76 | 10d6+9
10 109-120 77-84 =2Z 11d6 +10
11 121-132 85-92 =3 12d6 +11
12 133-144 93-100 -4 13d6 +12

 

2d10 damage, the black frost hardens rapidly. Those who fail to
save vs. breath weapon are encased in a tomb of black ice, with
only enough air for 1d4+1 rounds. After that time, the victim
suffocates. Breaking the ice from the inside requires the victim to
make a Strength ability check at —2 (allowed once per round).

Breaking the ice from outside requires 1d6 rounds of uninter-
rupted chipping. Magical fire melts the ice in 1d4 —1 rounds. Ex-
cess magical fire damages the victim.

Moon dragons are immune to cold. They have superior vision
and are not affected by either light or darkness spells. As they
age, moon dragons gain the following spell abilities, each usable
three times a day: young—light; juvenile—darkness, 15' radius;
adult—continual light; old—Melf's minute meteors; very old—
repulsion; venerable—reverse gravity.

Habitat/Society: Moon dragons have a strong feeling of superior-
ity. Arrogant and elitist, moon dragons are obsessed with the
moon motif and the dichotomy of light and darkness. Their trea-
sure consists mainly of white or black pearls and diamonds,
moonstones, and any coin called a “moon” by its society.

Ecology: The average moon dragon brood holds 1d4 eggs.

Moon dragons eat almost anything, and they keep a well-
stocked larder of frozen victims. Only rarely do they range about
their moon for food. Moon dragons are the mortal enemies of sun
dragons and attack them on sight.

Wizard

Spells MR Treas. Type AP
Nil Nil Nil 1,400
Nil Nil Nil 2,000
Nil Nil Nil 4,000
1 Nil F 6,000
2 Nil F 8,000
3 15% F 11,000
3/1 20% F 14,000
3/2 25 % DF 16,000
3/2/1 30% DF 18,000
3/3/2 35% ADF 20,000
3/3/2/1 40% ADF 22,000
4/3/2/1 50% ADFZ 25,000
Dragon, Sun

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Stars
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary or clan
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (15-16)
TREASURE: Special
ALIGNMENT: Any good

NO. APPEARING: 1 (2-5)
ARMOR CLASS: 1 (base)
MOVEMENT: 12, Fl 36 (C)
HIT DICE: 10 (base)
THACO: 11 (base)

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 +special
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d10/1d10/3d8
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Special
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Variable
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Variable

SIZE: G

MORALE: Elite (16)

XP VALUE: Variable

The benevolent sun dragons live and cavort on the surface of
suns. Though majestic and intelligent, they love life and freedom,
showing this love in a playful attitude.

The sun dragon's coloration changes as it ages, matching stellar
evolution. At hatching, they are fiery red; as juveniles, burnt or-
ange; as mature adults, brilliant yellow; when venerable, bluish
white. Finally, when a sun dragon becomes a Great Wyrm, it
shrinks back to almost hatchling size and turns a flat white color.
Some people confuse these sun dragons for very young moon
dragons, at much risk to their health.

Sun dragons speak their own language, as well as the language
of all good dragons and Common. Though a happy race, they
hate moon dragons, their mortal enemies.

Combat: Sun dragons have little interest in combat. Since they lair
on the hot surfaces of suns, few opponents get close enough to in-
vade their homes. When necessary, the sun dragon uses its breath
weapon to soften up opponents (3d8 damage), then pauses so that
enemies can reconsider and retreat. If the enemy does not, the
dragon breathes again and charges, teeth and claws flashing (1d10
each).

Sometimes it acts like a big cat, picking up its enemies, batting
them around, and swatting them into the air. In this case, the vic-
tims avoid claw damage but take 1d10 damage from the buffet-
ing. Victims lose initiative and must make an ability check
against half their Dexterity to take action in the following round.

Breath Weapon/Special Abilities: Sun dragons “spit” fireballs
with a range of 240’ and an explosion radius of 5’ per age category
of the sun dragon. The dragon can also coat the fiery wad with its

 

special saliva, delaying the blast for up to ten rounds. The dragon
can control the detonation time exactly.

Certain innate spell abilities manifest themselves at different
ages. A dragon can use each spell ability three times a day. Juve-
nile dragons gain heat metal; adults, fire shield; and very old
dragons, prismatic spray. Whenever a sun dragon takes flight, its
entire body is suffused by continual light. Sun dragons are im-
mune to all forms of fire; they save at —2 vs. cold-based attacks.
Finally, a sun dragon can innately sense the presence of a moon
dragon in its crystal sphere.

Habitat/Society: Sun dragons scoop out the fiery matter on a
sun's surface and hollow out good-sized caverns for their needs.
When a sun dragon lays its clutch of 1d4 +1 fire-resistant eggs, it
causes a solar flare to erupt on the sun’s surface.

When a sun dragon dies of old age, the body collapses in on it-
self, creating a sphere of annihilation (95% probability) or a well
of many worlds (5%). These creations are unstable, with a 1%
per day (cumulative) chance to dissipate unless a permanency
spell is cast upon them.

Sun dragon treasure is coated with the beasts saliva to keep it
from melting into nothingness. When the items are removed from
the heat of the sun, the saliva freezes into a kind of sleet that can
be easily removed.

Ecology: Sun dragons eat anything, but they are careful not to eat
intelligent creatures, for they respect life.

Breath Wizard

Age Body Lgt(’) Tail Lgt(’) AC Weapon Spells MR Treas. Type XP

a 10-19 5-10 4 2d8 +1 Nil Nil Nil 1,400

2 20-29 11-16 3 3d8 +2 Nil Nil Nil 2,000

3 30-39 17-22 2 4d8 +3 Nil Nil Nil 3,000

4 40-49 23-28 1 5d8 +4 1 25% Nil 6,000

5 50-59 29-34 0 6d8 +5 2 30% Nil 8,000

6 60-69 35-40 wack | 7d8 +6 2/1 35 % Nil 9,0 00
7 70-79 41-46 “2 8d8 +7 2/2 40% Nil 10, 000
8 80-89 47-52 —3 9d8 +8 3/2/1 45 % Nil 11,000
9 90-99 53-58 ~f 10d8 +9 3/3/1 50% H 12 ,000
10 100-109 59-64 =5 11d8 +10 3/3/2 55% H 13,000
11 110-119 65-70 -6 12d8 +11 3/3/2/1 60% H ,Z 14,000
12 20-29 11-16 =—7 13d8 +12 4/3/2/1 65% B,H ,Z 15,000

 

 

 
Dragon, Stellar

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Wildspace/phlogiston

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary/tribal

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Special

INTELLIGENCE: Godlike (21+)

TREASURE: See below

ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: —2

MOVEMENT: 12, Fl 48 (A)

HIT DICE: 50

THACO: 5

NO. OF ATTACKS: Special

DAMAGE/ATTACK: Variable

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Special

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Variable

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Variable

SIZE: G (1,200' base)

MORALE: Fearless (19-20)

XP VALUE: 54,000

Age Body Lgt(’) Tail Lgt(’)

4: 10-100 20-100

2 101-200 101-200

3 201d600 201d600

4 601-1,200 601-1,400

5 1,201-2,000 1,401-2,200

6 2,001-3,000 2,201-3,200

7 3,001-4,000 3,201-4,300

8 4,001-5,000 4,301-5,300
qe 9 5,001-6,000 5,301-6,300

10 6,001-8,000 6,301-8,400

11 8,001-10,000 8,401-11,000

12 10,000-1 million 11,001-2 million

Big, peaceful and highly intelligent, these enormous philosophers
of the phlogiston wander the flow seeking discourse with the
keepers of the crystal spheres.

The scales of stellar dragons are iridescent deep purple, with a
chrome drop at the tip of each scale. Gems of myriad colors and
sizes adorn the scales in random patterns, giving the stellar
dragon its name. Two main fins, like the fins of a lionfish, adorn
either side of the central torso, and four enormous lace-like wings
provide guidance and stability. Numerous other fins of various
sizes cover the rest of the dragon's body. They have no visible
arms or legs.

Stellar dragons, unlike their smaller kin, the radiants, are neu-
tral, They consider stooping to meddle in the affairs of smaller be-
ings to be loutish and in bad taste. When they encounter
humanoids, stellar dragons prefer to watch rather than involve
themselves. Only rarely do they speak with lesser beings.

However, if one has information previously unknown to the
dragon, this may gain its interest and even useful knowledge in
trade. Information is the stellar dragon's food and drink if any-
thing is, and it is willing to trade in kind. (One rumor has it that
the Greyhawk wizard Bigby learned his interposing hand and

Wizard

AC Spells MR Treas. Type
2 Nil Nil Any

1 1 10% Any
0 2 20% Any
=I 2/1 30% Any
<2 3/2 35 % Any
-3 4/2/1 40% Any
-4 4/2/2 45% Any
=35 4/3/2/1 50% Any
=6 4/3/3/1 55% Any
=7 4/3/3/2 60% Any
=§ 4/3/3/3 65% Any
-9 4/4/3/3/1 70% Any

grasping hand spells from a stellar dragon in exchange for a juicy
tidbit of information.)

Stellar dragons literally consume their knowledge, transform-
ing it into clear or milky gems of varying size. These gems of wis-
dom and pearls of knowledge push their way outward to rest
embedded in the dragon's scales. The number of gems and pearls
studding its scales mark its status among other dragons. The en-
crustation also roughly indicates its age; younger dragons have
few gems, whereas venerable stellars are literally covered in
jewels. The chief, or mikado, is another case entirely (see below).

Combat: Though not normally aggressive, the stellar dragon can
easily defend itself. Its unique “breath weapon” is gravitic: rather
than emitting breath, it draws things into the dragon's internally
generated sphere of annihilation. The mouth, a focus for the
sphere, confines its gravitic attraction to a cone 1200 yards long,
50’ wide at the dragon's mouth and 600’ wide at the base. A suc-
cessful save vs. breath weapon negates the effect.

The stellar dragon has three other innate attacks. First, it can
randomly teleport an attacker 500-6000 yards (1d12 hexes) in any
direction.
Dragon, Stellar

Second, its titanic intellect lets it use any wizard’s spell in the
Player's Handbook without error. It can also modify or create
spells to suit its needs; for example, it could merge darkness, 50’
radius and fireball to create a shadow flare spell. It can repeat
spells as often as needed.

Third, it can summon one denizen of another plane once per
round for up to seven rounds (DM's choice of any monster up to
half the dragon's own HD in strength). Summoned individuals
serve the dragon slavishly, remaining for 2d6 rounds before they
“snap” back to their home continuum.

Habitat/Society: The stellar dragons’ range covers the entire cos-
mos, so their exact numbers are unknown; parties encounter
them only rarely. However, once every 500 years, the stellar drag-
ons convene for their mating ceremony. In this ceremony, the
most worthy stellar dragons are selected by their tribal head,
called the mikado. There is only one mikado at any time. The mi-
kado is distinguished by the single crystal horn on his forehead.

Those dragons that the mikado selects as mates each produce a
single offspring. This dragon, born fully sentient, leaves to make
its own way among the stars.

Stellar dragon territories are vast, extending into other planes
and dimensions. Individuals negotiate boundaries to prevent in-
trusion on each other's space. However, they haggle endlessly to
obtain dynamic civilizations to monitor.

The dragons deal with attackers handily. However, if a party
approaches the dragon with respect and choice information,
chances are even that the dragon deigns to talk. Chances are
equally good that the dragon is thinking (that is, digesting) and
dismisses the interlopers.

The stellar dragon's ultimate goal is truth. It abhors dishonesty
and misinformation, Though its information may be cryptic, it is
never false. A lesser being’s misinterpretation is that being's own
fault. Misinformation causes a stellar dragon severe, painful indi-
gestion. And as with its smaller kin, a dragon in pain is danger-

Ous.

Ecology: The stellar dragon understands the underpinnings of the
multiverse. These primeval watchers have seen the rise and fall of
many civilizations. Such is the power of this knowledge that ac-
cording to some texts, the power of artifacts and relics comes
from the gems that encrust them. The crystallized everlasting
knowledge of thousands of beings, say these legends, provides
the power that runs these wonderful objects. How these gems
were wrested from the stellar dragons remains unsaid.

Gems of wisdom and pearls of knowledge are valuable almost
beyond calculation. The information they contain can be liber-
ated and used to gain enormous profit. Sages and wizards do
nearly anything to gain one.

 

 

 

 

 
Dreamslayer

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Wildspace/ Astral plane
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Special
INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (15)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: =2
MOVEMENT: 12, Fl 24 (B), SR5
HIT DICE: 8

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: Special
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 90%

SIZE: M (7' tall)
MORALE: Fanatic (18)

XP VALUE: 10,000

The realm of dreams is a dark, mysterious place in the mind of
every dreamer. Something in the nature of wildspace lets certain
beings use dreams as a portal, allowing them the chance to depart
the immaterial world and walk in the real world, The
dreamslayer looks for sleeping spelljammers and attacks them
through their dreams.

When seen in a dream, the dreamslayer’s most common form is
a black-shrouded humanoid figure. Its covered face is the face of
the dreamer, though its eyes are glowing white sockets, and the
facial features are twisted into a look of pure evil.

A dreamslayer can also appear as the living thing the dreamer
fears most, or in its true form: a 7’-tall bipedal lizard torso, glis-
tening black, with a 3’-long tail, talons, and a pair of draconian
wings. The face is a glowing, featureless white oval.

Combat; When the dreamslayer encounters a sleeping victim in
wildspace, the beast attempts to enter the victim's dreams. The
circumstances of a character's dreams are up to the DM.

The dreamslayer always seeks a dream featuring other people,
such as family or friends that the dreamer misses. A typical dream
features 1d6 of these “dreamfolk.” The dreamer sees the
dreamslayer enter the dream. To weaken the dreamer’s will, the
dreamslayer takes control of the dream and “slays” the dreamfolk
in gruesome ways. With each slaying, the dreamer (who can only
watch, not act) saves vs. spell; a roll of 20 means the dreamer
awakens, driving the dreamslayer back into the Astral Plane. A
normal save means that the dreamer neither weakens nor
awakens. Failure to save drains 2 points of Intelligence from the
dreamer.

After all the dreamfolk are “killed,” the dream scenery van-
ishes, replaced by a barren gray plain. The dreamslayer advances
to kill the dreamer. If the dreamer saved successfully, he can con-
jure one weapon or possession for every 3 points of Intelligence
remaining; if the dreamer is a spellcaster, he selects one spell per 2
points of Intelligence left. If the dreamer failed to save, he has
nothing but a nightshirt. In either case, use the dreamer’s normal
statistics for combat. Spells and items must be chosen before the
battle is joined.

The dreamslayer attacks once per round, making a normal at-
tack roll. If the dreamslayer hits, the victim loses 2 points of Intel-
ligence. When the victim reaches zero, see below.

Each round that the dreamslayer hits, the victim must save vs.
spell, with a cumulative —1 die roll penalty for each hit the

 

 

 

 

 

dreamslayer has already made (including those on the dream-
folk). A victim who saves can try to awaken instead of attacking,
using the saving throw and Intelligence check procedure de-
scribed above. A victim who wakes up recovers the lost Intelli-
gence at a rate of 1 point per 10 minutes of rest.

A dreamslayer can only be attacked inside a dream, and then
only by the dreamer. It cannot attack physically.

Habitat/Society: Dreamslayers have no society or organization.
Dreamslayers are not found on planets nor in the phlogiston.
They wander the Astral Plane, looking only for dreamers to in-
habit.

If a dreamslayer reduces its victim to zero Intelligence, it takes
over the body for one day per point of the victim's original Intelli-
gence. During this time, the dreamslayer does everything denied
to insubstantial forms. It eats and drink to excess and tries to ex-
perience anger, love, thrills, fear, and joy. Detect evil cast on the
host shows strong evil. ESP reveals an alien mind. Know align-
ment shows a chaotic evil entity.

When its time is up, the dreamslayer is hurled back to the As-
tral Plane, and the body collapses, dead. But if exorcise or dispel
evil is cast on the victim before that time, the dreamslayer leaves
the body, screaming. The victim falls into a deep sleep lasting 1d6
hours and awakens with no memory of the ordeal.

Though they roam the Astral Plane, dreamslayers cannot be
seen, heard, or felt. Dreamslayers only see sleeping beings;
waking life is invisible to them.

Ecology: Dreamslayers contribute nothing to the ecosystem.
They are the vultures of dreams, parasites of the night. Their
method of reproduction, if any, is unknown.
Dweomerborn

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Wildspace
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Magic
INTELLIGENCE: Very (12)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: —4
MOVEMENT: 6+ special
HIT DICE: 10
THACO: 11

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK; 1d12/1d12
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Special
SPECIAL DEFENSES: +2 or better weapon to hit
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Special
SIZE: L (8' tall)
MORALE: Fanatic (17)
XP VALUE: 9,000

Matter and energy are seldom annihilated. The magical energy
used to propel spelljamming ships produces its own “exhaust”
trail, invisible to the eye but detectable by detect magic. This en-
ergy sometimes forms into a sentient monster called a dweomer-
born. These bizarre creatures wander the spacelanes of wildspace
feeding on magical energy. They look especially for spelljamming
ships.

Dweomerborn appear as warped, distorted humanoid phan-
toms, 8’ tall, with long, delicate fingers. Each finger is tipped with
a long talon-like fingernail. They cannot speak.

Combat: When a dweomerborn finds a spelljammer, it tries to
“hitch a ride” by diving to the ship’s stern and riding its exhaust
trail. The dweomerborn can work its way up this exhaust, like a
rope, to the stern of the ship. To do so, it must make a Dexterity
check. Most dweomerborn have a Dexterity of 12 +1d6.

Consider a ship's stream to be 60 +6d20 feet in length. The
dweomerborn clings to the end of the stream and begins working
its way up. To an observer at the ship's stern, it appears that a
small patch of fog is following the ship, closing with it at 60’ per
round. Once within arm’s length of the ship, its claws grip the
hull, and it climbs aboard.

The dweomerborn also uses its claws to defend itself if pressed,
doing 1d12 damage per hand. When the dweomerborn uses its
claws for combat, it lets go of the ship's deck.

All dweomerborn have the following innate spell-like abilities,
each usable seven times a day: detect magic, identify, invisibility,
know school, and gaseous form, all cast at 10th level.

The dweomerborn drains spellcaster, magical item, and other
sources of magic (except artifacts, relics, and helms). Magical
items must save vs. electricity. Failure means the item loses its
magic permanently. A dweomerborn’s successful wrestling attack
on a spellcaster inflicts normal wrestling damage, and the victim
also loses one spell! (Choose the spell randomly, levels notwith-
standing.)

Once a dweomerborn gets 20 spell levels of energy, it jumps off
the ship, sated for the next 24 hours. Magical items supply spell
levels equal to the item’s XP value divided by 100 (minimum 1).

If a dweomerborn touches a rod of cancellation or wand of ne-
gation, the monster must save vs. death at —2 or die. A successful
save means it takes 2d10 damage.

Only magical weapons of +2 or greater enchantment can harm

a ar
aw

 

the monster. If a weapon scores a hit, the weapon must save vs.
electricity or become non-magical.

Due to its magical makeup, a dweomerborn is unaffected by
most spells, In fact, it devours magic aimed at it, except illusion
spells. The dweomerborn are affected normally by all illusions,
including phantasms. Sages speculate that this happens because
illusions are insubstantial and leave nothing behind. (Even a divi-
nation spell leaves something behind—the knowledge it imparts. )

Habitat/Society: Dweomerborn care nothing for treasure. They
simply wander wildspace, singlemindedly seeking new sources of
magic. Their bodies are living sponges, absorbing magical energy
without conscious effort. They have no society or organization;
each dweomerborn looks out for itself. They have no lairs, for
they require no sleep.

Ecology: Dweomerborn have no function. If they do not eat the
magical exhaust of spelljamming vessels, the trails simply dissi-
pate in about a week’s time with no effects. They cannot repro-
duce.

All spelljamming ships except those powered by orbi, forges,
furnaces, and non-magical engines can supply the energy to bring
a dweomerborn into existence. The chance of giving “birth” to a
dweomerborn is 1% for every two levels of the spelljammer; roll
the chance once per month of game time. The spellcaster is not
solely responsible for the dweomerborn’s creation; rather, the
ship's magical exhaust provides the last bit necessary for a birth.

Some speculate that since most spellcasters are humanoid and
since most spells are stored in human brains, there is a sort of “ra-
cial memory” that causes the dweomerborn to take humanoid
form.

 

 

 
Fal

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Wildspace
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Herbivore
INTELLIGENCE: Supra-genius (19)
TREASURE: ET
ALIGNMENT: Lawful neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 1
MOVEMENT: 9, Fl 3 (E), Bré
HIT DICE: 15

THACO: 6

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 4d8

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: G (50 +' long)
MORALE: Elite (15)

XP VALUE: 6,000

The Falmadaraatha (or “Fal” for short) are huge, slug-like crea-
tures that dwell inside hollow, lifeless asteroids. They are among
several races that share the title “scholars of wildspace.”

The Fal have large, soft, pulpy bodies that change from light
tan at birth to jet black at the end of life. At the fore end of their
bodies, they have a pair of small sensory antennae, bulbous eyes,
a massive mouth filled with sharp teeth ideal for burrowing, and
a smaller mouth above it, used for speech.

These gentle, brilliant, inoffensive giants burrow through
small planets that contain no sentient life and make their lairs in-
side, They speak their own tongue, as well as Common and most
human, demi-human and humanoid languages.

Combat: Although the Fal find combat offensive, considering it
the final refuge of the incompetent, they are perfectly capable of
defending themselves with a ferocious bite that inflicts 4d8 dam-
age.

On an unmodified to-hit roll of 20, the Fal catches its opponent
in its mouth. The Fal does not swallow, until it tries to persuade
the foe to surrender in a peaceful manner. Should the foe agree to
surrender, then renege on its word, the Fal attacks with no quar-
ter. To the Fal, a promise is sacred.

All Fal are telekinetic. A Fal can lift 1,000 pounds in this way
and, if it acts first, tries to neutralize an opponent by simply lift-
ing and holding it about 30’ off the floor until the opponent stops
fighting. A successful hit on the Fal breaks its concentration, and
the victim falls hard.

Habitat/Society: The Fal are solitary, though there is a 5% chance
of encountering 1d3 of these massive beings inside one asteroid,
chatting away about philosophy, metaphysics, or the state of the
multiverse. As a rule, the Fal are peaceful, honest, hospitable ge-
niuses.

Despite this solitude, the Fal enjoy polite company, provided it
does not visit often. (To a Fal, more than once a year is “often.”)
Any alignment may visit, though the Fal are wary around chaotic
evil and lawful good beings. The Fal consider these two align-
ments too extreme in their philosophies.

The Fal have a well-deserved reputation as some of the best
sages in the multiverse. They answer questions in exchange for
gifts worth more than 100 gp, anything from a bottle of fine wine
to a book or a painting. Unlike normal sages, however, the Fal do

 

 

 

 

 

not limit themselves to one or two subjects. This, they say, denies
the opportunity to learn all the multiverse has to offer. Hence,
any question asked of a Fal may be answered immediately (30%
chance), within 1d10 days (30% chance), in 1d10 months (30%),
or 1d10 years (10% )—but, if answerable, it will be answered.

The Fal lair (called a tcha) is surprisingly comfortable. Most Fal
decorate the tcha with accurate maps of planets and regions of
space, massive bookshelves, and little trinkets that grateful visi-
tors exchange for the answer to a question. Two types of plants
usually grow inside a tcha: a phosphorescent fungus for illumina-
tion, and hardy greens that make up the Fal’s diet. Many Fal also
enjoy fine wine and keep a well-stocked “cellar.” Predominant in
the tcha are books—lots of books, old and new, in different lan-
guages.

The Fal live at least 2000 years. To them, a year is like a day, so
they take things slowly. Many people mistakenly think the Fal
stupid, since the slugs talk so slowly. They believe hasty words
bring bad results.

The Fal often associate with the Gonn (q.v.) for discourse and
the Arcane for research material and books. The Fal are suspi-
cious of Aperusa (q.v.), but they delight in tinker gnomes.

The Fal venerate three gods above all others: Deneir, Thoth,

and Oghma.

Ecology: There is no romance in the Fal society. The Fal are her-
maphroditic, each Fal responsible for creating a “pupil” at some
point, tutoring it, and sending it on its way. No one has ever seen
a Fal pupil, however. It is possible that the Fal do not take ques-
tions when they are training a pupil.
Feesu

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Wildspace
FREQUENCY: Common
ORGANIZATION: Swarm
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Herbivore
INTELLIGENCE: Non- (0)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 6-48
ARMOR CLASS: 7
MOVEMENT: 3, Fl12(C)
HIT DICE: 2+2
THACO: 18

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: lhp
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Air deprivation
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: S (2' long)
MORALE: Unreliable (3) + special
XP VALUE: 270

Feesu are large, space-going moths that travel in swarms that are
a great nuisance to space travellers. Many spelljamming sailors
consider them bad luck, with good reason.

A flock of feesu appear as a mass of giant moths bathed in a
sphere of soft phosphorescent green light. Individual feesu look
like groundling moths. Like all moths, feesu are attracted to light.

Combat: Feesu are not known for combat, though as explained
below, combat seems to follow them! However, if provoked by
repeated attacks against the swarm, a moth attacks with tiny jaws
that cause 1 hp damage. Since the feesu’s bodily fluids are phos-
phorescent, the wound glows eerie green for 2d12 hours.

Feesu save at —2 vs. fire attacks. Due to their soft bodies, blunt
weapons are ineffective against them, but edged weapons do +1
hp damage.

The feesu’'s most insidious attack is unconscious. Since they re-
quire air to survive, their wings trap and store air. Thus, when
feesu leave a spelljamming ship, they inadvertently pull away one
day's worth of air per feesu that escapes.

Habitat/Society: The feesu travel in tight swarms that hold a thick
globe of air, enough to allow survival for 1d10 weeks. They re-
fresh this air by swooping down on spelljamming ships and flying
off.

The feesu instinctively seek sources of bright light, perhaps to
recharge the phosphorescent glow in their bodily fluids. Hence
they fly headlong toward any major light source, including blaz-
ing suns. After one turn within 5’ of a bright light source such as
any form of light spell, lantern, or light-producing magical item,
the feesu is “recharged” for 24 hours.

During this recharging period, the feesu swarm, the air around
them in a 10’ radius glowing with the intensity of bright sunlight.
If a character tries to drive off the swarm by waving a weapon or
shouting, the swarm makes a single morale check. Failure makes
the swarm take wing, but they hover within 120’ of the light with
the patience of the single-minded, lingering for days until re-
charging.

 

 

 

The problem with the feesu swarm is that its glowing cloud
near the ship creates a signal beacon for monsters and raiders.
The likelihood of an encounter in this situation increases to 10%.
For this reason, Pirates of Gith (see the first SPELLJAMMER™
Monstrous Compendium) and other raiders find the feesu useful,
since their tell-tale recharging glow often means a ship is nearby.
This may contribute to the superstition that feesu bring bad luck.
Curiously, the Aperusa (q.v.) consider the feesu good luck.

After 24 hours, the feesu’s glow slowly fades to a dim flicker in-
side its translucent, sickly-green body. Feesu do not suffer if they
cannot get recharged. But in this condition, the swarm insists on
getting light, and their morale increases to Fanatic (18).

Feesu cannot be trained, though communication is possible via
magical spells. From there, the caster’s negotiating skills deter-
mine whether the feesu cooperate.

Ecology: Feesu lair in the shattered hulks of space wrecks. The
gravity of planets makes them uncomfortable, for it inhibits their
flight. Feesu do not collect treasure.

Feesu lay 10d10 eggs every three months. Though most of these
egg-laying activities occur in the safety of their lairs, feesu are not
particular, occasionally laying eggs in out-of-the-way corners of
spelljamming ships.

The feesu’s bodily fluids are sometimes used to create a phos-
phorescent pigment. When exposed to a strong light source, the
paint glows with the strength of a normal light spell for one hour.
Spelljammers find this useful for travel in the phlogiston. Tinker
gnomes, never known for doing things the easy way, trap feesu in
elaborate cages and use the moths themselves for light while in
the phlogiston.

 

 

 
Firebird

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Wildspace

FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)

TREASURE: Special (magic items only)
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1-20

ARMOR CLASS: 4

MOVEMENT: FI 24 (SR 10)

HIT DICE; 5

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d8/1d8/2d6

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Flame lance (1d4 hull points)
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Flame sheath (12d6, 10’ radius)
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: L (20' wingspan)
MORALE: Elite (15)

XP VALUE: 2000

Firebirds match the description of giant eagles—10-20' wingspan,
large claws, sharp hooked beak—but they are not as intelligent,
and a beautiful orange-yellow flame envelops them. Their eyes
glow a painfully bright blue-white.

Combat: Like its terrestrial cousins the giant eagles, the firebird
uses its claws and beak as primary weapons. In a diving attack, its
normal 1d8/1d8 damage is doubled, and it adds +6 to its attack
roll. A successful hit also inflicts 12d6 burning damage. These gi-
ant birds swoop down on unfortunate ships, snatching sailors off
decks and igniting the ships’ sails. They are particularly fond of
gnomish vessels; they use a blowtorch-like tongue of fire to cut
their way into the hulls in search of both giant space hamsters and
their gnomish handlers.

The envelope of fire that gives the firebird its name creates a
zone of blast-furnace heat in a 10' radius, making melee combat
impossible without magical protection. This flame sheath also
renders firebirds impervious to normal missiles, since their in-
tense heat instantly vaporizes the objects. Large missile weapons
do only half damage to the firebird. Only magical weapons of +1
or better can damage a firebird. These weapons must make a sav-
ing throw vs. magical fire or be destroyed. The firebird’s fire, gen-
erated internally, serves as propulsion (SR 10).

In addition to its flame abilities, the firebird also possesses keen
eyesight. Adventurers have only a 5% chance of surprising a fire-
bird, Even in its lair this is true, since mated pairs of firebirds
roost in shifts, one keeping watch while the other sleeps.

Habitat/Society: Firebirds prefer to nest in asteroids, but are
equally at home in the hulks of gnomish spaceships. Using their
flame tongue ability, they hollow out the stone or metal, blowing
the molten liquid with rapid beats of their wings into fantastic

 

 

 

 

 

free-form nests. The nests are then lined with the shed feathers of
the parents. These feathers glow like burning embers, providing
heat for the firebird eggs and hatchlings. In each nest there is a
50% chance that 1-4 eggs are present, and a 25% chance of 1-4
young.

Like eagles, they continually add to their nests until they die.
Occasionally, firebirds link their nests into rookeries for mutual
defense and care, generally in the vicinity of liveworlds or aste-
roid reefs where potential prey is plentiful. Any treasure in a fire-
bird nest is magical, since only magical items or devices can stand
the birds’ extreme heat. There is a 10% chance that 1d4 random
magic items have melted into the nest's structure. Due to the mag-
ical nature of the firebird’s flame, the magic in the items transfers
to the structure of the nest. For instance, a ring of protection
melted into the nest makes it more resistant to damage.

Ecology: Firebirds fill an ecological niche similar to that of a hawk
or cage, feeding on small pests. Unfortunately for star travelers,
the firebird considers the crews of spelljammers “small pests.” The
advent of spelljamming humans and demihumans has provided
firebirds with tender pre-packaged meals that are fairly easy to
catch.

One other firebird attribute attracts adventurers: Their feath-
ers are ingredients of elixirs of life. Shed feathers can fetch up to
1,000 gp apiece. An adult firebird has 1d3x10 usable feathers.
Firelich

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Wildspace
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Genius (17 +)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Any evil
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 0
MOVEMENT: Fl 36 (D), SR 4
HIT DICE: 16+
THACO: 4

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 16d6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Fear
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 40%

SIZE: L (18’ long)
MORALE: Fearless (19)
XP VALUE: 10,000

Firelichs are high-level evil mages whose bodies were prepared for
lichdom upon their death. Such mages, either through ignorance
(such as in casting fire spells) or spell failure, exploded in the phlo-
giston. The lich-preparation spells in their bodies turned them
into living fireballs of undeath, racing through wildspace,
screaming in eternal pain and looking for something to collide
with, as a way to extinguish the flames.

A firelich resembles a comet of yellow, orange, and red flames.
The “head” of the comet has a skull-like face with a mouth that
appears locked in a perpetual scream. The “head” measures 6’ in
diameter, with a fiery tail 18’ long trailing behind it. It has no
limbs.

Combat: Unlike its groundling brethren, a firelich goes out of its
way to find confrontation. Its blazing eyes always seek spelljam-
ming ships, in the same way that a person on fire would look for
water or a blanket.

The first sign that a firelich is in the area is its luminous, fiery
appearance, followed by an ear-splitting shriek of pain. Viewers
must save vs. spell at —2 (wisdom bonuses allowed). Those who
fail are frightened as though by fear. Those who succeed still take
—2 to their attacks for the rest of the encounter.

The firelich attacks by plunging headlong into the ship in a
screaming dive. It makes an attack roll to hit. Treat the initial im-
pact as a greek fire attack (Concordance of Arcane Space, p. 57).

After the initial damage, the ship's deck must make an item sav-
ing throw vs. magical fire. If the deck succeeds, see below. If the
deck fails, the firelich has crashed below deck, creating a hole
2d6 +6 feet in diameter. The firelich flies downward, striking the
ship's inner hull. If this hull fails another saving throw vs. spells,
the firelich has made another hole and flown clear through the
ship, its fire still burning strongly. In frustration, the firelich
shrieks and flies off.

Any time a natural 1 is rolled on the ship’s saving throw, a wall
of fire (as the 4th-level wizard spell, cast at 16th level) has sprung
up on the affected deck, surrounding the hole made by the fire-
lich. The ship also suffers a Critical Hit (Concordance of Arcane
Space, p.59).

If a deck’s save succeeds, the firelich fails to penetrate and ex-
plodes as a fireball cast at 16th level. On the round after the ex-
plosion, the firelich’s life-force recreates its comet-like body
outside the ship, and the entity flees frantically through space,
screaming in renewed frustration.

Since a firelich is undead, it can be turned. It is considered a
Special undead.

Although it is a lich, the firelich cannot cast spells known in its
previous existence. It has no limbs for the somatic components of
a spell, and it cannot mouth words for the verbal portion.

Habitat/Society: It is unknown how the wizard gets from the
phlogiston to wildspace. Since the only wizards that can become
fireliches are the ones that had made previous preparations for
lichdom, some guess that the arcane lich ceremonies tear a tempo-
rary hole into wildspace. The energy to create this tear may come
from the explosion that created the firelich. If this is true, the hole
certainly closes immediately after the firelich enters wildspace.

Fireliches are solitary, shunning even those who share their suf-
fering. Due to their pain and probable madness, fireliches are not
communicative, though some observers have managed to coax a
few fireliches to reveal their identities.

Ecology: Fireliches are an aberration in any healthy ecosystem. If
it perishes, only wisps of smoke remain. Its spelljamming ability
is innate and cannot be harnessed.

A story has circulated through wildspace about a group of pi-
rates that captured a firelich and tried to connect it to their spell-
jammer helm. The firelich overloaded and exploded. As the ship
burned, the bits of firelich reincorporated and flew off, scream-
ing.

 

 

 
Flowfiend

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Phlogiston
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Pack
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Highly (13)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 2-8

ARMOR CLASS: 0
MOVEMENT: 9, Fl 18 (D)
HIT DICE: 7+7

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 5
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d12/1d12/1d12/1d12/2d10
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: +1 or better weapon to hit
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 10%

SIZE: Varies
MORALE: Very steady (14)
XP VALUE: 5,000

Sometimes travellers between crystal spheres fall (or are thrown)
into the phlogiston flow. Most simply calcify. Some evil folk are
spared this fate; a shadowy presence of great power and evil “res-
cues” the castaways by transforming them into smaller versions
of itself. Thus the flowfiends are born.

Flowfiends vary in height, depending on the race of the original
victim; as a rule, a victim grows between a quarter and a third of
its original height. Flowfiends have four muscular arms, each
with a powerful hand with overgrown fingernails. The flow-
fiend’s mouth is filled with razor-sharp teeth. The creature walks
upright, its body bulging with exaggerated, twisted muscles rip-
pling under sickly yellow skin. Sometimes, the victim's previous
features are still recognizable. It has its own language, a form of
Common as ugly and transformed as it is.

The flowfiend “swims” through the flow in search of food or
other victims to convert. The beasts know the flow offers many
spelljamming vessels travelling between the crystal spheres.

Combat: Flowfiends relish combat and waylay as many ships as
possible. Their bite does 2d10 damage, but the fiends rely on their
four sets of claws, each set doing 1d12 damage.

One of the flowfiend’s favorite tactics is to use two arms to pin
a victim, then use its other two arms and its bite to reduce the vic-
tim to a bloody pulp. If the flowfiend gets two arm hits on one
victim, the victim is pinned. A pinned character is hit automati-
cally by the flowfiend’s jaws and other arms. A pinned foe may
attempt to break the beast’s hold once per round, using the
punching and wrestling rules in the Player's Handbook. The flow-
fiend has Strength 18/50.

Note that the pin and claw/bite attacks are for victims who are
ineligible for “conversion” into more flowfiends. To gain new re-
cruits for transformation, all flowfiends can cast detect evil, de-
tect good, detect magic, and know alignment at 7th level, though
only one at a time, Only evil or chaotic neutral characters are eli-
gible. Flowfiends attempt to pin evil victims harmlessly and carry
them away. If a victim fights, the flowfiend strikes it, doing non-
lethal damage.

Flowfiends sometimes use their powerful claws and jaws to
grab a spelljammer hull and climb on deck. If more than three
flowfiends are encountered, they attack at different parts of the
ship to surround their victims. Sometimes they just toss sailors
overboard to other flowfiends waiting in the flow.

 

 

 

 

 

Flowfiends are immune to the calcifying processes of the flow
and to all hold, flesh to stone, paralyzation, or petrifaction spells.
They regenerate 2 hp each round, starting three rounds after they
first take damage. A dead flowfiend’s body must be burned to
ashes, or it regenerates.

Habitat/Society: The flowfiends have forgotten everything about
their former lives and now exist as a hunting pack eager to please
their master. All flowfiends obey the mysterious entity they call
“Great Father.” Scholars speculate that this is a double-strength
flowfiend, probably a native of the Outer Planes. The flowfiends’
greatest goal in life is to please the Great Father by bringing vic-
tims for conversion and capturing meat.

Flowfiends take candidates for conversion to a remote spot in
the flow resembling a rocky island. This is a platform built of
thousands of calcified victims of the flow. The victims even make
up decorative columns, a dais, and a 6' * 6’ altar.

When victims are placed on the altar, all flowfiends in attend-
ance begin a shrill whistling. In 1d10 hours, the Great Father ap-
pears and transforms the victim, which takes 1d4 turns. The
victim makes a system shock roll; success means the birth of a
new flowfiend. Failure means the victim dies. The Great Father
returns to his secret lair, and the ceremony ends.

Chaotic neutral victims turn chaotic evil. All memories of the
victims’ past lives give way to a new purpose: Kill and capture for
the glory of the Great Father!

Ecology: Flowfiends have no gender. They add to their numbers
only by getting more victims from spelljamming ships. Flow-
fiends require no sleep, just food.

No one knows why the Great Father is creating flowfiends.
Some speculate that the monster plans to conquer wildspace.
Gadabout

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Wildspace, shipboard
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: None
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Photosynthetic
INTELLIGENCE: Non- (0)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 7
MOVEMENT: 36

HIT DICE: 2

THACO: N/A

NO. OF ATTACKS: N/A
DAMAGE/ATTACK: N/A
SPECIAL ATTACKS: N/A
SPECIAL DEFENSES: N/A

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (4’-6' wide)
MORALE: N/A

XP VALUE: Nil

Spacefaring elves use this small winged plant as personal convey-
ance for short-distance travel outside a spelljammer’s air enve-
lope, such as boarding actions between ships, or as emergency
life-support.

The gadabout reflexively wraps its branches around the
wearer, spreads its butterfly-like “wings” and allows its wearer to
fly through space in a continually refreshed air bubble. This bub-
ble is generated when the plant takes in carbon dioxide and gives
off oxygen. The photosynthetic properties of the colorful wing-
leaves even provide a nourishing syrup, which the user can drink
from a flexible stalk near his or her head.

This closed environment persists as long as the wings remain
intact and there is sufficient sunlight. In the phlogiston, a contin-
ual light spell can substitute for sunlight.

Habitat/Society: As these plants remain under the elves’ control,
information about their growth and development is sketchy at
best. The elves have only recently sanctioned gadabouts for sale
to non-elven races.

Gadabouts do not generate seeds. Therefore, each gadabout is
a rare commodity. Since the plants are expensive (2500 gp each),
owners jealously guard them; no one has yet dissected one.

 

Ecology: Easily cared for, the gadabout requires only sunlight and
occasional waters. Adventurers of any class can use the gada-
bout, controlling it by thought as a wizard or priest controls a
helm. Scholars do not know how the elves achieved this crucial
modification.

Though gadabouts are hardy, they do not tolerate abuse well.
When punctured, the entire plant undergoes rapid decomposi-
tion, turning to an evil-smelling mess within two hours.

Gadabouts, as well as flitters, men-o-war, and armadas, are
modified fruit from the starfly plant (q.v.). The gadabout is ar-
rested in the motile fruit stage, and modified further to be seedless
as well as responsive to commands.

Gadabouts live about 25 years. The central part of the plant re-
mains the same size; the only parts that grow are the wings. As
with the other elven spacefaring plants, owners must trim the
wings occasionally. The central plant is flexible enough to accom-
modate various humanoid body types. Ogres as well as gnomes
have used them.

 

 

 
Gammaroid

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: None

DIET: Omanivore
INTELLIGENCE: Animal (1)
TREASURE: Various
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: -—2/-10
MOVEMENT: 9,SR9

HIT DICE: 100

THACO: 5

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 10d6/10d6/60d4
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Hide limbs, flame sheath
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: G (2500' diameter)
MORALE: Fearless (19-20)
XP VALUE: 125,000

The gammaroid is a gargantuan variety of the giant snapping tur-
tle. Like its terrestrial cousin, it has a voracious appetite and rules
any territory it occupies. Its unique breeding habits have made it
the source of monster legends and religious rites on many worlds.

Combat: On land or in space, the gammaroid is a fearsome oppo-
nent. In space, the gammaroid masquerades as an asteroid, al-
lowing smaller rocks to adhere to its body by gravidic attraction.
When prey happens by, its enormous head shoots forth, smashing
victims with 6d4 hull points of damage from its powerful jaws.
This attack can swallow small vessels whole. The bony ridges of
the gammaroid’s beak are sharp enough to rip through ship hulls,
and its claws do 1d6 hull points of rending damage on impact (or
10d6 to a living target).

The gammaroid can also pursue fleeing prey by retracting its
legs and head, rotating on its central axis, and flying at spelljam-
ming speeds (SR 9, maneuverability F). When this deadly missile
hits a ship, the target suffers an automatic “Ship shaken” critical
hit; the whirling serrated edge of the gammaroid's shell may (30%
chance) cut in half or utterly destroy the ship. In atmosphere, at-
mospheric friction from its rapid rotation creates an enveloping
fireball that causes an additional 12d6 damage. The gammaroid
uses this whirling attack primarily against its favorite prey, the
gossamer noble (q.v.).

Habitat/Society: Gammaroids spawn on planetary bodies larger
than size A. They land near geologically unstable regions, hom-
ing in on areas where the heat is near the surface (up to ten miles

 

 

 

 

 

 

deep). The female digs until she reaches magma, then lays 2-8
eggs in the lava pit. When the egg laying is complete, she crawls
from the hole, allowing it to collapse behind her. Within 50 years,
the young gammaroids hatch and tunnel upward, usually surfac-
ing far away from the hatchery. This spawning causes great de-
struction to surface dwellings, and even the largest underground
monsters are easy prey to the hungry hatchlings.

Ecology: The gammaroid is the undisputed master of any ecosys-
tem it inhabits. Its only natural enemy is the gossamer noble,
which it disables by cutting off the tentacles, then attacking with
claws and enormous jaws. Though the gammaroid prefers the
gossamer noble, it may attack spelljamming ships during times of
great hunger to get at the soft, tiny morsels inside. However, the
metal-and-wood canisters that hold these small feasts do not set-
tle well with the gammaroid’s palate.

The lifespans of gammaroids are very long. Specimens with
shell growth patterns indicating millennia of molts have been re-
corded. The shells of dead gammaroids are quite useful as spell-
jammer hulls, as the lightness and toughness of the shell combine
to make a highly maneuverable armored vessel. They can fetch a

king's ransom.
Gonn

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Wildspace
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Scale
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Special
INTELLIGENCE: Genius (18)
TREASURE: U
ALIGNMENT: Lawful good
NO. APPEARING: 8

ARMOR CLASS: -4
MOVEMENT: Fl 48 (A)
HIT DICE: 18
THACO: 3

NO. OF ATTACKS: See below
DAMAGE/ATTACK: Special
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 25%

SIZE: H to G (25' to 1,000’)
MORALE: Fearless (20)
XP VALUE: 25,000

Though wildspace is fraught with mind-blasting perils, it also
holds great beauty. The musical, pacifistic race known as the
Gonnlingdaah (or the Gonn for short) brings much beauty to
wildspace. These good beings float through wildspace creating
hauntingly beautiful music and preserving life. Though blessed
with brilliant intellect, they live a simple but extremely long life.
Instead of speaking, they sing. The Gonn can sing in their own
mysterious language and in Common.

The Gonn resemble gas giants: perfect spheres with bands of
different colors decorating their bodies. To the novice sailor, the
Gonn appear by a trick of perspective as far-off planets.

Combat: Though the Gonn do not consider combat their first op-
tion, they wisely realize that sometimes one must fight to pre-
serve good. Before any combat, however, the Gonn attempt to
negotiate with all but the most violent, life-hating beings. The
Gonn offer to help foes change their violent ways. If the opponent
rejects their offers of help and peace, the Gonn bring their full
powers to bear with no hesitation.

The Gonn’'s power is music, and their songs can accomplish
amazing feats. Their most powerful song is a high-pitched keen-
ing that affects all enemies of the Gonn’s choice within 240’. All
targets take 10d10 sonic damage (save vs. breath weapon at a —2
penalty for half damage). Targets that fail to save must roll saving
throws for their equipment vs. crushing blow, also at a —2 pen-
alty. Due to the enormous power of this song, the Gonn are loathe
to use it except against the most destructive foes.

Another destructive musical attack is a single shrill note. All
non-living matter in 240’ must save vs. disintegration or shatter.
Living beings of the Gonn’s choice are deafened for 1d4 rounds.

The Gonn prefer a gentle, soothing song of pacification. All
targets of the Gonn’s choice must save vs. spell at a —1 penalty or
immediately cease combat and relax, listening to the sweet music.
In addition, 30% of victims fall asleep for 2d10 turns. Those who
save are confused and can take no action for one round.

Gonn can cause magical spells within 240’ to cease functioning
by singing a lilting ditty that acts as dispel magic at 9th level.

A Gonn can sing each of these songs three times a day. Gonn
prefer to sing in groups of eight, called “scales.” All Gonn in a
scale must sing the same song. A Gonn sings solo only if it has no
other choice. Such a song is diminished in power; saves are made
without penalty.

 

Since Gonn music comes from their every pore, silence spells
are useless against them. However, enemies in the circle of silence
are immune to Gonn songs. Bard songs cannot counteract Gonn
songs, since the behemoths sing so powerfully that they drown
out any other sound.

Habitat/Society: In every scale, one Gonn is the leader, called the
“conductor.” The scale moves in formation, each Gonn singing
one note.

Gonn live for up to six millennia, wandering wildspace, collect-
ing songs and tales. Each Gonn’s name is a long song that would
take 1d20 hours to sing. Among shorter-lived races they adopt
shorter melodies as temporary names.

Though the Gonn love to answer questions, the asker had best
be ready for a long answer. They ramble on and on, singing in-
stead of talking. Typically, one who seeks information from one
of these singing sages must listen through 1d8 days of non-stop
singing. Each day, there is a cumulative 10% chance the Gonn
gives the information. The price of an answer is a song or story
(make a non-weapon proficiency check to produce a successful
song). Failing this, the Gonn accepts gems worth 500 gp instead.

Besides their attack spells, Gonn can also sing the following
spells: heal, restoration, raise dead, identify, and legend lore.
Costs for these spells are 1,000 gp in gems per level of the spell
cast, plus a song or story. However, Gonn defend, rescue, and
heal anyone that they see hurt by evil, without charge.

The Gonn wander often, and like the Fal (q.v.), they dislike in-
trusions by the same visitors more than once a year. It is practi-
cally impossible to find the same scale of Gonn one met before.

Ecology: Once a century, a scale of Gonn engages in a song of per-
petuity, which takes 1d12 months and results in the birth of 2d4
immature Gonn, The young cannot sing for five years, when they
reach maturity. Until then, they hum.

The Gonn try to preserve life any way they can. Some specu-
late that either Oghma or Apollo created them to bring beauty to
the universe.

 

 

 
Gossamer

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Standard Noble
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Space Wildspace/phlogiston
FREQUENCY: Uncommon Rare
ORGANIZATION: Shoal Flotilla
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any
DIET: Scavenger Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Non- (0) Animal (2-4)
TREASURE: Nil Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 20-200 1-8
ARMOR CLASS: 10 4
MOVEMENT: FI 12 (D) SR 4
HIT DICE: 1 hit point 58
THACO: 19 8
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 20
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d3 1d6(x20)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Poison stinger Poison stinger
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil Nil
SIZE: T (6” diameter) §G (120' to 250’

diameter)

MORALE: Unreliable (2-4) | Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: 7 49,000

Gossamers are the spacefaring cousins of the jellyfish. They
travel in groups known as shoals. Gossamers usually drift among
the rocks of asteroid fields and the junk of space sargassos,
though they occasionally venture into open space. They scavenge
leftover prey, cleaning areas of organic junk.

Gossamer shoals offer beautiful color displays that communi-
cate their moods. Contented gossamers are awash with waves of
cool colors—green, blue and purple punctuated with bright flecks
of yellow and orange. When danger threatens, waves of red and
amber wash over the shoal from the point of contact. These dis-
plays lead some sages to theorize a group-mind among gossamer
shoals.

Combat: Like the jellyfish, the standard gossamer grows stinging
tentacles. These tentacles secrete a nauseating paralytic poison. A
saving throw versus poison offsets the allergic reaction. Gossa-
mers only attack prey smaller than themselves. If the offending
object is larger than 1', the shoal immediately changes direction
away from the offending critter. The gossamer may accidentally
collide with and sting larger creatures, or foolish crewmen may
touch a dead gossamer that has landed on a ship deck.

Ecology: Most of the gossamer’s body consists of empty space,
and depends on weightlessness to maintain its structural integrity.
If introduced to a gravity plane, the gossamer collapses under its
own weight and dies. Air also renders the gossamer's body liquid.
Dead gossamers collapse in 1d3 minutes into viscous pools of
evil-smelling liquid. The liquid is a solution of the enzymes that
cause the gossamers to sting, and remains dangerous until it evap-
orates (one turn).

 

 

 

 

 

Gossamer Noble

Actually a colony of specialized life forms, the gossamer noble is
10d10' in diameter, with enormous sacs that act as sails, allowing
it to navigate at spelljamming speeds. Cloudy currents and color-
ful lightning-like fashes fill its pearly, translucent body.

Hundreds of tentacles trail from the noble’s base. These are
long (50-500’), supple hawsers with wicked spikes that inflict 1d2
points each on exposed flesh. The gossamer noble uses 1d20 of
these tentacles in battle. Victims must save at —4 vs. paralyza-
tion, and the spikes’ digestive enzymes inflict an additional 1d6
points of damage per round. These solitary predators live on
spacefaring life forms (including smaller spelljamming ships) and
are highly dangerous. They are the prey and natural enemy of
gammaroids (q.v.).
Grav

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any

FREQUENCY: Uncommon (Elite: Rare)
ORGANIZATION: Clan

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (6) (Elite: High (13))
TREASURE: ] (Elite: R (E))
ALIGNMENT: Lawful neutral

 

NO. APPEARING: 6-60 (Elite: 1 per 30 miners)

 

 

 

ARMOR CLASS: 10 (Elite: 6 (10))
MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 3 +1 (Elite: 5 +1)
THACO: 17 (Elite: 15)

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d8 (weapon)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Gravity reduction
SPECIAL DEFENSES: None

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: S (3’)

MORALE: Steady (13) (Elite: Elite (14))
XP VALUE: 270 (Elite: 650)

Gravs are short, stocky humanoids who manipulate gravity.
They mine ore and gems from unclaimed asteroids and moons.

A grav is short, squat and square, with a small head in compar-
ison to the rest of its body. Gravs are as tall as dwarves but are
wider at the shoulders. Miners wear dingy gray clothes and min-
ing gear such as helmets, gloves, and belts.

The Elite are thinner than their worker minions but are still
squat. They wear refined, foppish clothing and seldom sully their
hands with manual labor. Some Elite wear leather protection un-
der their showy clothing—hence the lower Armor Class.

All gravs are dense, with three times the mass of a being of a
similar size. This increases their air envelope, allowing them more
time to search wildspace for potential mining sites.

Combat: Gravs are a peaceful race, intent on their mining and
leaving other races alone. If provoked, however, gravs retaliate
by reducing gravity beneath a target (and thus its weight). A grav
can only affect one target at a time, with a range of 60’. However,
the target can contain many objects; for instance, after mining
gems, the gravs move them into large crates and then float the
crates aboard ship.

The grav can reduce the target's weight by 25% per round. Af-
ter four rounds, the target begins to float. The grav can make the
target hover or float away. When the target floats beyond the
grav's range, it plummets to the nearest gravity plane.

The grav can just drop the target or gently lower it to the
ground. If a grav's concentration is disrupted, as by a blow, the
target drops immediately, taking normal falling damage.

Gravs use this power to intimidate and scare their opponents
away. If confronted, a grav first demonstrates its power on an in-
animate object. If this intimidation doesn’t work, the grav sus-
pends the opponent in the air, incapacitating it.

Though peaceful by nature, gravs hate silatics (q.v.), which eat
metal. Even the Elite attack silatics on sight.

Habitat/Society: In the strictly heirarchical grav society, the Elite
order the Miners (workers), who obey almost without thinking.
Miners who question this centuries-old structure are promptly
“brought in for questioning” and “moved to a position better fit-
ting their talents’—servitude to some minor Elite on the home-
world, This is ultimate shame.

If characters try to subvert Miners against their overseers, the

 

 

Elite politely ask the characters to leave the area. If they persist,
the gravs remove them without harm,

Elite gravs can use spells and advance to 9th level. These wiz-
ards power the Argosy, the grav's standard ship.

Argosy

Built by: Gravs Standard Armament:
Used primarily by: Gravs 2 heavy ballistae
Tonnage: 150 Crew: 4 each

Hull Points: 150 2 medium ballistae
Crew: 55/200 Crew: 2 each

Maneuver Class: D
Landing—Land: Yes
Landing—Water: No Beam Length: 175’
Armor Rating: 0 Saves as: Stone

Ship's Rating: As for helmsman Power Type: Major helm

Cargo: 100 tons
Keel Length: 175’

An Argosy resembles a small dwarven Citadel. The ship's stone
surface is pitted like a moon; some craters are concealed port-
holes. One part is flattened, allowing it to land and take on pre-
cious cargo. (Most of the ship’s interior is cargo space for ore and
gems. Both Miners and their Elite overseers sleep in the cargo
bays.) The Argosy’s armaments are strictly for defense.

Ecology: The name and location of the gravy homeworld are un-
known. Conversations with Elite gravs reveal that their home-
world is divided into fiefdoms, each ruled by one Elite family.
Family prestige depends on wealth.

Some say the scarcity of information about their homeworld
represents the Elite’s attempt to foil potential thieves. However,
thievery is totally alien to the grav race. Any thought or sugges-
tion of stealing merely puzzles a grav. The Elite may maintain se-
crecy to prevent outsiders from disrupting the social system that
keeps them in power.

 

 
Great Dreamer

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Wildspace, oceans
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Godlike (21+)
TREASURE: See below
ALIGNMENT: Lawful

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 0
MOVEMENT: Sw 18, Fl 30(F), SR 18
HIT DICE: 72-144
THACO: 5

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: See below
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Variable
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Variable

SIZE: G (10-20 miles)
MORALE: Fearless (19-20)
XP VALUE: 61,000-133,000

These enormous spacegoing cetaceans are apparently responsible
for the occurrence of whales and other cetaceans, both in space
and on worlds with plentiful water, They travel through space in
a spherical envelope of airy water, so large that weather patterns
occur on its surface, creating the image of an immense elemental
whale swimming through the cosmos. Within it swims the
Dreamer's “entourage”: 1-3 leviathans, their attendants, and 2-12
intelligent delphinid “knights” of 9-12 HD each. Statistics for en-
tourage members are in the GREYHAWK® Monstrous Compen-
dium (see “Whale”) and the first SPELLJAMMER™ Monstrous
Compendium (see “Delphinid”).

Like the delphinid, the Great Dreamer is trilaterally symmetri-
cal. Its three eyes, equidistant around the head, shine with re-
flected starlight.

Communication with the Great Dreamers is not difficult; their
broad-band telepathy makes conversation easy within a range of
1,000 miles. Their “speech” can be circular, seemingly wandering
from topic to topic in a stream of consciousness, but they invari-
ably return to the subject at hand.

Combat: The Great Dreamers do not normally engage in combat;
their great power speaks for itself. The aura given off by these be-
ings is so powerful, opponents must save vs. spell at —4 or be
caught up in the beauty of the Dreamers’ existence.

Against those who do save and still have warlike intentions, a
Great Dreamer can also contact the Elemental Planes of Water
and Air, summoning 1d8 elementals of 12-16 HD to do its bid-
ding. The elementals either wash or destroy an offending spell-
jammer; only when its entourage takes severe injury does a
Dreamer order its elementals to kill an opponent.

If nothing dissuades an attacker, then he faces the onslaught of
the Dreamer's entourage.

In addition to the listed abilities, the entourage members have a
sound lance than can stun opponents within a 10-mile range. Tar-
gets must save vs. breath weapon or be stunned for 1d4 turns.
The delphinids direct their sound lances against one opponent at
a time. Larger whales aim at entire vessels, and can also change
tones to resonate with a ship’s hull, causing a ship to rattle itself to
pieces (2d6 hull points of damage per round).

If necessary, the Great Dreamer uses its magical ability to pro-
ject a giant waterspout from its water envelope. The waterspout
has a range of 20 miles. The ship must save vs. crushing blow or

 

 

 

 

be destroyed by the rushing wall of water. Ships that save take
2d10 hull points of damage.

A Great Dreamer's bite can inflict damage according to its Hit
Dice. Dreamers of 72-83 HD inflict 3d4 * 2 hull points, those of
84-95 HD inflict 3d4 x 3 hull points, and those of 96-144 HD in-
flict 3d4 x 4 hull points.

If a Dreamer’s attack roll is 2 more than needed to hit, it can
swallow its opponent. It can either digest a victim or send him to
a destination of its choice. A Dreamer’s tail can deliver a crushing
blow with damage equal to half its HD. (For example, a 72 HD
Great Dreamer does 36d8 damage, or 36-288 hp.)

Habitat/Society: It is unknown whether the Great Dreamer gener-
ates its spherical envelope of water and air or opens a gateway to
the Elemental Plane of Water. The envelope instantly responds to
the Great Dreamer’s commands.

These beings remain in the flow, traveling from sphere to
sphere, attending to cetacean affairs on many worlds. Every 1000
years, the leviathans of each world receive an audience with the
Great Dreamers to report on the events of the previous millen-

nium. They remain for a year before returning to their home-
worlds.

Ecology: Though they feel neutral toward humanoids, the
Dreamers are always lawful in alignment. They preserve the
abundance of life both in the seas and in the endless ocean of the
flow. They perceive existence to be a continuous song, an endless
paean to life itself. All members of a Great Dreamer’s entourage
continuously sing this hypnotic song.

Perhaps as a function of this guardianship of life, the Great
Dreamers have one final ability: the power to grant immortality
to one being, once per year. Usually the champion who receives
this honor is a cetacean. Rarely, however, a humanoid who has
greatly aided the Dreamers’ subjects may receive this gift.
Greatswan

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: _ Elven lands, wildspace
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Flock

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Herbivore, insectivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic good

NO. APPEARING: 1-6

ARMOR CLASS: 5

MOVEMENT: 6, Fl 36 (B), (C ) when mounted, Sw 18
HIT DICE: J#3

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d6/2d6

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: L (10’ long, 28’ wingspan)
MORALE: Very steady (14)

XP VALUE: 420

Greatswans are massive swans raised and trained by elves to act
as guards and war mounts. Like normal groundling swans,
greatswans are ferocious fighters, and many have a nasty temper.

As arule, greatswans are found with any race of elves in wild-
space. Greatswans sometimes ride aboard elven men-o-war (25 %
chance) and armadas (50%). Normally, there are 2d6 greatswans
on the former and 4dé6 on the latter. Each vessel also has a like
number of elven swanrider cavalry. A greatswan can carry up to
two elf-sized riders (the equivalent of about 240 pounds).

Greatswans are beautiful, graceful birds with characteristic
long necks and snow-white plumage. The swans have no lan-
guage.

Like their mundane counterparts, greatswan males are called
“cobs,” and the females are called “pens.” Young greatswans are
called “cygnets.”

Combat: Though greatswans are gentle birds, they nevertheless
fight with a strong strike of their beak (1d6 damage) and wing
buffeting (2d6 damage). The wing buffet has a 50% chance of
blinding and confusing the opponent for one round, There is a
25% chance that the sheer force of the wings knocks a man-sized
or smaller foe backwards 2d110 feet.

If a greatswan is used as a mount, it cannot perform the wing
buffet while in flight. However, an elven swanrider can urge his
mount into what amounts to a power dive against an enemy; the
elf's weapon and the greatswan’s beak each gain a +2 bonus to
THACO and do double damage. Elves use mostly medium lances
for such attacks.

Greatswans have excellent senses, and have a 75% chance of
detecting an intruder, even an invisible one. This makes them well
suited for guard duties. Swans that spot an intruder raise a rau-
cous call and close with the enemy, wings flailing madly.

Greatswans are immune to all forms of poison.

Habitat/Society: Greatswans wander exclusively in elven lands.
The elves fear that introducing such large birds to normal envi-
ronments may alter the balance of nature. Thus they keep the
birds close at hand and watch their movements closely.

 

 

 

 

 

 

Greatswans are aquatic birds, and are excellent swimmers.
This comes in handy when the elves are exploring water worlds in
wildspace.

Unlike groundling swans, greatswans are not territorial. They
become hostile only if intruders approach within 30’ of either
their nests or guardposts. Greatswans recognize the names their
trainers give them and can learn command phrases, one com-
mand per point of Intelligence.

Greatswans are bred to require little air. A lungful of air lasts
the bird 24 hours. A greatswan’s personal gravity drags along
enough air for two elf-sized riders to breathe for 5d10 turns.

Elves found with greatswans have the Airborne Riding non-
weapon proficiency. Such elves are always at least 3rd-level fight-
ers, armed with some sort of charging weapon (such as a spear,
pike, lance) and a bow (long or short) in addition to their normal
melee weapon. A great swan never carries any rider but an elf.

Encountered without elves in attendance, an even number of
greatswans are mated pairs. There are 1d2 cygnets and 1d4 eggs
per pair.

Ecology: As mentioned earlier, the elves confine the greatswans
to their own sylvan lands and cities, fearful that the birds’ large
appetites will upset the balance of nature. Greatswans eat green
plants, especially water plants, and they eat large numbers of in-
sects, digesting even the most poisonous insect without harm.
Greatswans consider feesu (q.v), space moths, a delicacy. Elves
use feesu as a reward during a cygnet's training.

Some elven mages use greatswan feathers to create Quaal’s
feather tokens, wings of flying, and winged boots.

 

 
Grell, Colonial

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

Soldier/
Worker Philosopher Patriarch
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any Any Shipboard
FREQUENCY: Rare Very Rare Very Rare
ORGANIZATION: Hive Hive Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any Any
DIET: Carnivore Carnivore Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average Exceptional Supra-Genius
(8-10) (15-16) (19)
TREASURE: U(see below) W H
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: 1-10 1-2 1
ARMOR CLASS: 5 5 (0) —10 (10)
MOVEMENT: Fl 12 (D) Fl 12 (D) SR 9
HIT DICE: 5 7 9
THACO: 15 13 11
NO. OF ATTACKS: 11 11 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: by weapon type 1d8 hull pts
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil
SIZE: M M L
MORALE: Very Steady _ Elite Fanatic
(13-14) (15-16) (17)
XP VALUE: 2000 5000 9000

The “civilized” grell is a colonial (as the term is used for ants and
other colony animals) version of the underground ravager of
Oerth. It is similar in size and appearance to terrestrial grells. Un-
like its solitary kin, however, it can speak via telepathic link with
both grell philosophers and the highly intelligent grell patriarch.

The grell's arrogance surpasses all other intelligent beings.
Spacegoing grells acknowledge no equals, regarding even terres-
trial grells as lesser beings. “Lesser being,” in the grell language,
means the same thing as “food.”

Combat: Grell battle tactics resemble those of their lesser kin;
they use levitation ability to hide in the upper reaches of large
chambers. However, their ability to function in groups lets them
mount vicious assaults, wielding tip-spears and lightning lances.
Tip-spears are edged metallic heads that fit by suction over the
tips of a soldier-grell’s tentacles. The grell can make slashing at-
tacks doing 1-6 points of damage, or stab doing double damage.
Victims impaled on tip-spears are considered paralyzed, and sub-
ject to the same fate as those who are grappled, i.e., automati-
cally hit by subsequent tentacles, etc. (See “Grell” in the
GREYHAWK® Monstrous Compendium for full information on
grappling.) Anyone captured faces imprisonment and later con-
sumption as part of the grell raiders’ food supply.

The grell lightning lances deliver 3d6 electrical damage (save
vs. spell for half damage). Each lance has 36 charges and can fire
once per round.

In wildspace, grell ships do not spelljam so much as submerge
and surface in space, travelling “underneath” space using some bi-
zarre dimensional passage that the grell patriarch generates.
When out in the flow, the front end of the ship opens, exposing a
hollow tube that runs the length of the vessel. The grell ship then
ignites the inrushing phlogiston, ejecting the exhaust gases from
the rear in a motion similar to that of a squid. The spelljamming
patriarch controls the size of the phlogiston burn.

In a hopeless situation, the grell patriarch can transform the
ship into a vaguely humanoid form via telekinesis. The giant ar-
mored fighter strikes with an oversized halberd for 1d10 hull
points of damage. The halberd can loose an electric arc for 3d6
hull points, but takes one round to recharge. The giant's fists can
strike for 1d3 hull points each.

  

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Grell have a distinct pyramidal hierarchy. The
patriarch stands at the top, and a secondary caste, the philoso-
phers, handles the lower castes. Each grell “family” occupies a
ship.

The Patriarch: Each grell ship has a solitary patriarch who han-
dles the workings and navigation of the ship. He is a sessile mass
of flesh approximately 30' in diameter whose tentacles have
grafted themselves to the floor of his chamber. The patriarch’s
enormous brain controls the higher functions of all the shipboard
family. All other castes serve the patriarch.

Philosophers: These grell serve as intermediaries between the
patriarch and the workers. They have limited authority to lead
the worker/soldier grell in organized combat. A grell philosopher
may (20% chance) wear a ring of protection (AC 0). Some philos-
ophers can use magic as 2nd-level wizards. There is one philoso-
pher for every 10 worker/soldier grell.

Workers/ Soldiers: This common garden-variety grell, limited
in intelligence, performs minor maintenance aboard ship. They
make up most of a grell family or raiding party.

Imperator: Above all families stands the Imperator, who holds
absolute sway over all grell families and can unite them as a single
fighting force. Known as the Legion of Gold, due to the uniform
golden color of their spaceships, this horde sweeps over space like
locusts, leaving nothing but debris in its wake.

Ecology: Grell are the true wastrels of wildspace races. Arrogant
and vicious, they hunt an area to exhaustion, then move on to
more fertile regions. Their (re)discovery of human space means
only a rich storehouse of meat to these monsters.

 
Gullion

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

¢ Planet/Around ships
FREQUENCY: Common
ORGANIZATION: Flock
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Animal (1)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 10-100
ARMOR CLASS: 10 (6 in flight)
MOVEMENT: 10, Fl12
HIT DICE: 1

THACO: 20

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d2
SPECIAL ATTACKS: None
SPECIAL DEFENSES: None
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: S (3')
MORALE: Irregular (5)
XP VALUE: 7

Gullions are related to terrestrial seagulls but have adapted to
life in space. Spelljamming crews despise them, because they
waste precious air and demand a good deal of food.

Due to exposure to many different magics and climes, the gul-
lions vary widely in color, from purple to orange to normal gull

colorings, but all are shaped like large seagulls.

Combat: Gullions try to steal food. For birds with animal intelli-
gence, they are incredibly sneaky; they sometimes stage diver-
sions in order to get their beaks on someone's dinner.

Gullions only attack in numbers and only when extremely hun-
gry. If a large group of gulls haven't eaten in days, they attack the
nearest food—usually crew members on a ship. They flock to-
gether and attack with their beaks, trying to knock foes uncon-
scious. Once a crew member has been knocked out, the gullions
search for food on the body. If there isn’t enough food to satisfy
them, they start eating the victim.

Many green crews plagued with gullions try to kill as many as
possible as soon as they enter wildspace. This is difficult, for the
gulls have adapted to the air envelope around ships and use the
gravity line to fly erratically. This gives them a low Armor Class.
More experienced crews tolerate the colorful birds, and usually
cast food out into the air envelope to keep the scavengers satis-
fied.

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Gullions can survive in almost any environ-
ment. They hitch rides with ships from one world to another. The
gulls stay in the travelling ship's air envelope, as they have no
spelljamming ability. These gulls have also grown accustomed to
the gravity plane and actually sleep while floating along the
plane.

Upon landfall, gullions jump spelljammers and may inhabit
port towns their whole lives. Planet-bound natives often wonder
how these colorful gulls suddenly appeared.

Ecology: As scavengers, gullions aren't picky about what they
eat: Rats, garbage, and leftovers all form part of their diet. Some
innkeepers encourage gullions to stay around, primarily to eat
the remains of last night's dinners.

Nesting areas for flocks of gullions with exceptionally bright
colors can become tourist attractions, This can lead to nasty in-
fighting between bar owners about which establishment owns a
particular flock. The gullions don’t care, as long as they get fed.

 

 

 
Insectare

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Clan
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Very (12)
TREASURE: W (A)
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil
NO. APPEARING: 2-12
ARMOR CLASS: 3
MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 3+1
THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d8 (weapon)/1d2/1d2
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: None
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 20%
SIZE: M (6’)
MORALE: Elite (16)
XP VALUE: 420

Insectare are a humanoid race rumored to be the descendants
of a magical union of elves and insects. The insectare's goal is to
rule the spaceways, but they wage this campaign subtly, trying to
play one race against another. While instigating these problems,
the insectare try to stay in the background.

These humanoids are immediately recognizable by their lime-
green skin and the two eight-foot antennae that sprout from be-
hind their elven ears. For this reason, they wear heavy, concealing
clothes such as large robes with hoods pulled in close. That way,
an insectare can hide its antennae by slipping them down its back
or coiling them in the folds of a loosely-fitting robe.

Close examination of an insectare’s eyes reveals that they are
slightly multifaceted. Getting that close may prove difficult,
though, as insectare do not ordinarily allow other races near
them. From five feet away, the eyes look normal.

No one has ever reported seeing a female insectare, but for that
matter, not many people have even seen a male insectare without
a hood. Therefore, they could have been dealing with a female
and not noticed.

Insectare can communicate with each other by touching their
antennae together. They also have their own language, a clicking,
lilting tongue that is a mixture of the common tongue and the in-
sects’ original language. Characters who understand the common
tongue have a 30% chance of catching the general idea of a con-
versation between two insectare, but cannot provide a compre-
hensive translation for others.

Most insectare stand 6' or taller and are heavily muscled be-
neath their tough exoskeleton. Most insectare encountered out-
side their home sphere are fighters, wizards, thieves, or any
combination of the three.

Combat: Insectare are ruthless in battle. Once a fight has begun,
they never give up until the enemy is completely defeated. They
chase fleeing foes to exact surrender, and they execute survivors
who refuse surrender.

Insectare use a long sword and their two antennae, which at-
tack as whips (1d2 damage). Often, one antenna entangles the op-
ponent’s weapon hand (with an attack roll of 18 or better) while
the other antenna and sword attack. An entangled limb cannot
attack; to disentangle the limb, the character must make a Dex-
terity ability check.

In combat, the insectare’s chitinous exoskeleton provides an

 

 

 

 

 

Armor Class equivalent to plate mail, without restricting move-
ment. The exoskeleton has no known weak points.

Insectare wizards jealously guard their magic, relying on their
martial skills to bring them through a battle. The insectare obvi-
ously have magical ability, since they can spelljam, but the limits
of insectare power remain unknown. Insectare wizards never re-
veal information without overwhelming reason. (The threat of
death doesn’t qualify.)

Habitat/Society: Insectare live in a closed society. They forbid
outsiders to set foot on their secret homeworld. Captured inter-
lopers can expect a harsh interrogation, to find out if any other
beings know of the world’s location, and then public execution.
Insectare do not believe in keeping prisoners.

Insectare live in large hollowed-out mountains that rise out of
the endless forests of their homeworld. These mountains are said
to be honeycombed with dwellings. Not much is known about
these community homes, but they are probably a remnant of
their insect heritage.

The two major classes of insectare society are the wizards and
the priests. The wizards are the explorers, forever searching wild-
space for more magical power. The priests stay on their planet,
diligently serving their god, Klikral.

The insectare mages’ goal, after learning spelljamming, was to
acquire magical knowledge and power from other races, without
drawing attention to their goals. Consequently, insectare prefer
to work subtly among foreigners.

Some insectare are proficient thieves, despite the aversion to
thievery on their homeworld. Insectare thieves are only inter-
ested in magic; gold, jewelry, gems hold no attraction. When an
insectare steals a powerful magic item, it often leaves at least one
misleading clue, pointing at another known thief (such as a player
character).

Insectare priests rarely leave their homeworld, for they prefer
not to venture far from Klikral. If a priest is found offworld, its
mission must be highly important to the insectare race. Klikral
Insectare

grants insectare priests who reach 2nd level one special ability:
They can summon insects from the surrounding area and send
them against any one opponent. This swarm of insects arrives in
one round, inflicts 1d8 points of damage per round, and remain
for one round per level of the spellcaster.

Unlike other insectare, priests have normal humanoid eyes. No
explanation has been found for this difference. The symbol of one
multifaceted eye with two antennae off the two corners means
that the owner or creator is an insectare wizard, fighter, or thief; a
similar symbol, with a regular eye and two antennae, represents
an insectare priest. These two symbols, obviously signatures of
some sort, appear on stolen insectare documents.

Multiclass options for insectare are wizard/fighter, wizard/
thief and wizard/fighter/thief. Priests never engage in another
profession. Insectare can reach 11th level in all classes except wiz-
ard, where they reach 14th level.

Ten ancient insectare priests on the insectare homeworld serve
as high priests of Klikral. They are all 11th-level priests and never
leave the planet. They are twice as large as the usual insectare,
and can communicate directly with Klikral.

The insectare travel space in their own distinctive ship, the
klicklikak. The sleek ship resembles a grasshopper head with two
long antennae trailing behind it. The name means “service to Kli-
kral.”

Insectare Klicklikak

Built by: Insectare Saves as: Thick wood

Used primarily by: Insectare Power Type: Major or minor
helm

Tonnage: 20 tons Ship’s Rating: As for helmsman

Hull Points: 18 Standard Armament:

Crew: 10/20 1 heavy ballista

Armor Rating: 6 Crew: 4

Maneuver Class: C Cargo: 10 tons

Landing—Land: Yes Keel Length: 80’

Landing—Water: No Beam Length: 30'

The insectare power the klicklikak with a special spelljammer
helm consisting of a shiny copper sphere with two holes. To pro-
pel the ship through space, the spelljammer inserts its two anten-
nae. Only insectare can use this helm; conversely, insectare
cannot use other kinds of helm.

Rumors have it that a new, larger version of the klicklikak
roams the spaceways, but no sightings are confirmed.

Ecology: Spacefaring peoples shun the insectare, especially elves.
Elves vehemently deny any suggestion that they are related to the
insectare. Insectare, aware of this discord, go to great lengths to
remain inconspicuous while among elves and other foreigners.
Although other races don’t know much about the insectare mas-
ter plan, they note the insectare’s secrecy and deviousness, which
puts many people on guard.

A good weaponsmith can work the outer skin of an insectare,
which is a hard exoskeleton, into a +1 shield, and can fashion an
antenna into a short rope or whip. However, insectare consider
this practice abominable, and anyone who uses such a weapon or
shield earns every insectare’s instant hatred.

 

 

 

 

 

 
Lhee

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Common Lesser Greater
Cc Any Any Any
FREQUENCY: Uncommon Uncommon Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Pack Pack Pack
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any Any
DIET: Omnivore Omnivore Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7) Low (5-7) Semi-(2-4)
TREASURE: D Nil W
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Chaotic neutral Chaotic good
NO. APPEARING: 1-12 1-8 1-6
ARMOR CLASS: 2 3 4
MOVEMENT: 9,Fl12(B) 9, Fl12(B) 9, Fl 12 (B)
HIT DICE: 1+*1 3+3 5+5
THACO: 19 Lt 15
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 1 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d2 1d8 1d6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil Nil Nil
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil Nil Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 45% 30% 15%
SIZE: § (1' high) 5 (3' high) M (5' high)
MORALE: Irregular (5) Fanatic (17) Steady (11)
XP VALUE: 120 270 650

The lhee are canine pranksters of wildspace, more of a nuisance
than anything else. Their behavior swings wildly from acting like
regular groundling dogs to being irresponsible imps.

Although there are three types of lhee, they all share certain
physical characteristics. All lhee have a pair of dextrous human-
oid hands instead of front paws. Each type of lhee has a pair of
great, snowy-white dove wings mounted just behind the shoulder
blades. All lhee speak a language of yaps, growls, and woofs.
They can also speak with blink dogs.

The three types of hee resemble different breeds of dogs. Lesser
lhee resemble dachshunds, chihuahuas, and miniature poodles.
Common lhee look like pit bull terriers, doberman pinschers, and
rotweilers. Greater lhee appear as great danes, St. Bernards, and
sheepdogs.

Combat: The common lhee’s bite does 1d8 damage. The common
lhee actively look for fights. All lhee can cast invisibility (at will),
and audible glamer, dancing lights, blur, and darkness 15’ radius
three times a day each. Common lhee function as 3rd-level spell-
casters.

Habitat/Society: The lhee have a definite heirarchy. The bigger
lhee bully the smaller. A pack of lhee consists of all one type,
though not necessarily all one breed. Each pack has a leader that
the others follow, if they feel like it.

A pack of lhee lairs inside caves or hollows in small moons or
planetoids. Common lhee chew everything they find to small
bits; consequently, they have no treasure.

The life of a lhee consists of racing comets, eating, chasing
spelljammers, eating, and annoying sailors. And eating. They ex-
hibit some groundling dog habits such as a love for chasing fe-
lines, and a strong attraction to trees, wizard’s staves, ship masts,
and the like.

Common lhee are the most violent, aggressive, and downright
nasty lhee. They enjoy pulling pranks, though their jokes tend to
be violent. (“Hey, let's push that torch-wielding halfling through
that portal into the phlogiston!”) They tend to be stupid, and the
lesser hee are forever tricking them.

Lesser Lhee

What the lesser lhee lack in size and ferocity, they make up in
brains and mischief. They enjoy pestering spelljamming sailors

 

 

 

 

 

by pulling little innocent pranks on them. Lesser [hee are the most
intelligent type of space canine, and they prefer to wriggle out of
combat situations by spell use. Lesser lhee have 50% skill in pick-
ing pockets. Lhee love to steal little things and commit small acts
of sabotage on spelljammers.

In addition to the spells available to the common lhee, the
lesser lhee can cast grease, spook, and phantasmal force three
times a day at 2nd level.

Lesser lhee bite for 1d2 damage. These small animals avoid bat-
tle if at all possible.

Greater Lhee

Greater lhee act like big, friendly dogs. They exhibit many traits
of groundling dogs, such as loyalty, frantic displays of happiness
at seeing humans, a fierce love of playing, and a gullibility that
shocks even the lesser lhee. For instance, a greater lhee will fetch a
burning stick tossed into the phlogiston. Like other lhee, greater
lhee love to play jokes on spelljamming sailors, though they be-
lieve the sailors want them to!

Greater lhee have the same spell capability as the common
lhee, casting spells at 6th level.

The greater lhee's bite does 1d6 damage, and they are not reluc-
tant to fight. They feel fights are part of a dog's life.

Ecology: Each pair of hee encountered is a mated pair. There is a
10% chance that the pair have a litter of 2d4 puppies. These pup-
pies have no powers or abilities until they reach adulthood at six
months old.

Lhee are difficult to train, though it is possible if the trainer can
get a puppy no older than three weeks. Training takes a full year.

Trained lhee are sometimes used as watchdogs, but this does
not always work, since the dogs have a horrendously limited at-
tention span.
Mercurial Slime

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Wildspace
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Colony
ACTIVITY CYCLE; Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Non- (0)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1-4
ARMOR CLASS: 2
MOVEMENT: 3, Fl 48 (E), SK 2
HIT DICE: 4

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 5d10
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: L (10 +’ diameter)
MORALE: Fearless (20)
XP VALUE: 420

The mercurial slime is widely feared by wildspace sailors as a
mindless, swift, and deadly organism.

A colony of mercurial slime resembles a large blob of silver liq-
uid drifting aimlessly in space. Several colonies can be found to-
gether, though no closer than 30’ apart. As a result, only one
colony at a time attacks a ship, though other mercurial slimes
may block escape routes.

Mercurial slime has no sensory organs, but it can follow sound
waves to their source. It is also attracted to light. When the slime
is in an atmosphere, it can sense motion by disturbances in the air.

Combat: Mercurial slime is pervaded with strong acid that works
much like blood and digestive fluids do in a human, dissolving
nutrients and carrying them to individual cells. If the acid con-
tacts living flesh, it dissolves the skin, causing 5d10 damage. All
inorganic matter must save vs. acid at a —2 penalty. Weapons
that hit the slime must save before they roll damage. If a weapon
fails, it dissolves, causing no damage.

Mercurial slime is most hazardous when it contacts a spelljam-
ming ship. Should a vessel touch mercurial slime, it must save vs.
acid. If the ship fails, the mercurial slime makes a standard attack
roll. Its acid damages the ship like a heavy ballista.

Sometimes the slime’s silver surface catches starlight and re-
flects it back in lovely color patterns. Anyone staring at this dis-
play is mesmerized as if by hypnotic pattern cast at 4th level.
Nothing frees the mesmerized viewer except a violent shaking for
one round.

Mercurial slime is not organic. Thus it cannot be affected by
spells that control nature, such as charm plant or charm animal.
Fire, cold, and electrical attacks have no effect. However, mercu-
rial slime is susceptible to magic missile spells.

Habitat/Society: Mercurial slime is unintelligent and has no soci-
ety or organization beyond the colony. It merely drifts through
space, seeking to feed. It cannot communicate.

 

Ecology: The organism reproduces by fission while it is dissolving
living tissue. There is a straight 1% chance that the slime repro-
duces after each hit against an organic target. The slime splits into
two creatures, the victim takes an extra 5d10 damage, and the
two creatures reach full size instantly.

Mercurial slime converts light, including starlight, into propul-
sive energy. It can attain spelljamming speeds. Mercurial slime
does not need air to survive, but it cannot land on planets, since
gravity breaks it up into a fine mist which dissolves rapidly into
nothing.

Enterprising folk have attempted to use the slime as an organic
snelljamming source. The big problem with this plan: The mercu-
rial slime attacks any container holding it, requiring a saving
throw at —2 (cumulative) vs. acid each round.

Alchemists have tried in vain to collect mercurial slime to cre-
ate a powerful acid, but the stuff keeps eating through vials and
containers.

Some sages theorize that mercurial slime is in fact nothing more
than a groundling slime or jelly carried into space and somehow
altered. Others call it a plague sent by deities who do not wish to
see the races ply the spacelanes. It is interesting (and reassuring)
that no clerics endorse this theory. Some elven scholars guess that
mercurial slime may be a weapon from the Unhuman Wars.

 

 

 
Meteorspawn

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Wildspace
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Rocks and minerals
INTELLIGENCE: Non-(0)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: -6
MOVEMENT: Fl 6 (E)
HIT DICE: 19

THACO: 2

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 3d10
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: G (100 +' diameter)
MORALE: Steady (11)
XP VALUE: 11,000

For as long as the human race has been in space, sages have won-
dered what creates meteors. The meteorspawn is not necessarily
the only source, but its presence certainly explains the reason for
some of these flying rocks.

Meteorspawn are huge globes of living rock. The smallest me-
teorspawn measures at least 100' in diameter; some specimens are
rumored to reach diameters of thousands of feet. The meteor-
spawn has a circular mouth that measures 1/4 the spawn’s diame-
ter. Two other holes lie opposite each other on the left and right
rear quarters. These holes, waste orifices, and are no wider than
one tenth the spawn’s diameter. The meteorspawn’s coloration
ranges from black to earth brown to slate gray.

Despite its great size and big mouth, the meteorspawn has no
interest in eating spelljamming sailors nor their vessels. It drifts
placidly, eating rocks and minerals.

Combat: Meteorspawn avoid fighting until they have lost 25% of
their total hit points. Only this much damage makes the thick-
skinned, unintelligent meteorspawn realize it is under attack.

The meteorspawn’s only real attack is the meteors that it shoots
out of its two opposing holes at extremely high speeds. If the me-
teorspawn is less than 1,000’ in diameter, it can rotate its body
and bring both holes to bear on an enemy. Meteorspawn wider
than 1,000' can only bring one hole to bear.

Any unfortunate caught in the line of fire gets hit by 1d4 mete-
ors, each doing 3d10 damage. In ship combat, treat the meteors as
heavy catapult shots. Whether or not a meteor hits, the shot flies
out of the combat into wildspace. Another meteor is born!

The meteorspawn’s mouth does not bite, though if a ship col-
lides with the mouth, it gets sucked in. The ship must make a sav-
ing throw vs. spell, or the part of the ship stuck in the
meteorspawn’'s mouth is destroyed as though by a disintegrate
spell. The ship's bow is normally the part which ends up colliding
with the mouth. Each sailor in the affected area must make also
save or suffer disintegration.

Habitat/Society: The meteorspawn is a solitary drifter. Chunks of
rock and mineral floating through wildspace make up its diet.
The meteorspawn scoops up its food the way a whale scoops up
plankton. Using extreme pressure, it crushes the rock for mineral
nutrients.

 

Waste material in the form of boulders is stored in two sacs
deep behind the mouth. When these sacs are filled, the meteor-
spawn shoots boulders of waste rock out into space at great pres-
sure and speed.

In rare (5%) instances, meteorspawns get close enough to plan-
ets to pull some atmosphere along with it. Since the meteorspawn
does not need air to survive, this atmosphere remains until it is
taken by grateful spelljammers.

Ecology: Most meteorspawn live for several centuries. During
this time, the meteorspawn gestates 1d4 young. At the end of its
life, it breaks up, and—a rare and wondrous sight—the young
emerge. There is a 1% chance that any meteorspawn encountered
is about to give birth.

The initial size of the young depends on how many are born. If
four are born, each is a quarter the size of the parent. If three are
born, each is a third the size, and so on.

Meteorspawn are a mixed blessing. On one hand, they clear
away loose rock and debris that poses a navigational hazard. On
the other hand, they create new hazards, high-velocity meteors
that crash through ships. The only consolation is that the meteor-
spawns create less matter than they consume, so at least the over-
all volume of rocks and minerals in a given area is reduced.

Some mariners consider the birth of a meteorspawn to be a sign
of good luck, seeing the symbolism of renewed life from death. In
addition, when the parent breaks up, sailors can retrieve enough
ammunition for 2d10 shots for each catapult on board. The size
of the catapult does not matter; there are plenty of rocks of all
sizes to choose from!
Monitor

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any

FREQUENCY: Uncommon

ORGANIZATION: Patrol

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Herbivore

INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (16)

TREASURE: D

ALIGNMENT: Lawful good

NO. APPEARING: 4-7

ARMOR CLASS: 0

MOVEMENT: 12, Fl 24 (A), Sw9

HIT DICE: 10

THACO: 11

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2 or 3

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d10 (weapon) +1 (strength bo-
nus) or 1d8/1d8

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 50%

SIZE: M (6' tall)

MORALE: Elite (16)

XP VALUE: 8,000

The monitors are benevolent beings who patrol the farflung
reaches of wildspace and the phlogiston. However, space is quite
large, and the monitors’ forces are spread thin. Understandably,
not everyone feels comfortable around monitors. Their absolute,
black-and-white code alarms beings who compromise or bend
rules to accomplish things.

Monitors manifest in two different ways. In a crystal sphere or on
the Outer Planes, they appear as gold-skinned, winged centaurs.
Their eyes and hair blaze as if made of red flames. In the phlogiston
(only), monitors appear as silver-skinned pegasi, with icy blue eyes
and manes. Both forms have the same movement rate.

Monitors speak their own complex language, Common, and all
of the tongues of evil races native to wildspace and the phlogis-
ton.

Combat: Monitors are not averse to combat when necessary,
though they usually give opponents a chance to surrender before
starting hostilities.

In their centaur form, monitors wield two-handed flame
tongue swords. The swords strike twice per round, inflicting 1d10
hp on small or man-sized opponents, and 3d6 hp on larger oppo-
nents. Flame tongues are +1 swords, +2 vs. regenerating mon-
sters, +3 vs cold-using, flammable, or avian creatures, and +4
vs. undead. Monitors have Strength 17.

In pegasus form, monitors can breathe a cone of cold three
times a day at 10th-level ability.

In addition, either of the monitor's forms may strike with the
two forehooves, doing 1d8 damage each. This, however, is a last-
ditch measure, as the monitors consider it undignified.

Besides their normal magic resistance, monitors are immune to
all spells from the school of enchantment/charm.

A monitor reduced to 0 hp falls and dies in 1d4+1 rounds. Be-
fore the monitor expires, it makes a loud keening noise. This spe-
cial distress call relays who is dying, where they fell, and the
descriptions of those who committed the deed. Any monitors in
the same crystal sphere immediately receive the report. Satisfied,

the monitor dies, its body and sword becoming a puff of golden
smoke.

Habitat/Society: Monitors travel in patrols with a rotating leader,
giving all squad members the chance to command. The squads

 

 

 

ra yi
6

wander everywhere, enforcing the tenets of their lawful good
alignment: punishing evil, rescuing the helpless, and protecting
all innocent life from harm or malice. They personify goodness,
raising the alignment of lawful good almost to an art.

Monitors are unselfish, just, brave, unswervingly loyal to their
ethos, and dedicated to their mission of eradicating or reforming
evil. They are not intimidated by anything and calmly face over-
whelming odds. One tale tells of a monitor who was surrounded
and outnumbered by a horde of Pirates of Gith (see the first
SPELLJAMMER™ Monstrous Compendium). When asked for her
last words, the monitor replied, “You are all charged with murder,
piracy, and threatening a monitor. Surrender now, and things
will go easy for you.” The scary thing is, after the dust of battle
settled, she had won.

Unfortunately, monitors are not the greatest diplomats. They
have a black-and-white view of right and wrong. Compromise is
repellent. As they say, “Shades of gray may feature a bit of white,
but they also harbor a bit of black.” In some cases, monitors have
rescued halfling thieves from the clutches of illithids, then turned
the thieves over to the proper authorities for incarceration.

With all the evil races such as the neogi, illithids, and beholders
in wildspace, other races are reluctant to alienate a powerful race
of good beings who try to stem the tide of evil. Monitors are the
butt of many complaints, jokes, and grumblings, but people turn
to them first when a great evil arises.

Ecology: Though monitors appear as beautiful male or female
centaurs, they do not reproduce. Young monitors have never
been seen. Some scholars guess that monitors are the spirits of de-
ceased paladins, rewarded by various good deities with these
powers and responsibilities. Some cynical observers believe the
opposite: paladins who were not “good enough” have been stuck
with the task of policing space.

Monitors do not require air, food, or drink, though they some-
times eat food to make other beings feel at ease. Even so, they are
strict vegetarians.

 

 

 
Owl, Space

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Parliament
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night
DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Genius (18)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic good
NO. APPEARING: 1 (2-8)
ARMOR CLASS: 6
MOVEMENT: 3, Fl 12 (B)
HIT DICE: 3+3
THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4/1d4/1d3
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: S (2 1/2' tall)
MORALE: Elite (15)
XP VALUE: 420

Every spelljamming ship needs a navigator; wildspace is big, and
the chance for error is great. Space owls are intelligent owls witha
gift for navigation. Humans, dwarves, and gnomes use them
most often.

Space owls resemble normal owls, with coloration ranging
from dark brown to snowy white. They have big, yellow, un-
blinking eyes. The owls stand about 2 7/2’ tall, with a wingspan of
4'

These highly intelligent birds can communicate with all birds,
both of groundling and wildspace origin. Space owls also speak
Common and up to three other languages (DM's choice).

Combat: These cerebral birds are reluctant to enter combat. They
would much rather discuss the conflict with their foe, trying to
dig deep into the enemy's subconscious to explain their violent
tendencies. Is it nature? Is it a bad upbringing? Since most foes re-
sent being mentally dissected, this practice winds up infuriating
an enemy even more.

Thus, the space owls have no choice but to defend themselves,
using their two sets of sharp talons to inflict 1d4 damage each.
The space owls follow up with a beak blow, doing an additional
1d3 damage.

Since space owls are brilliant, they realize that these attacks sel-
dom deter an enemy. So they have developed the ability to cast
invisibility, mirror image, blink, ventriloquism, and spook, each
three times a day, at 6th level. Also, owls can cast find the path,
true seeing, and augury, each once per day.

Habitat/Society: Space owls congregate in small groups called
parliaments. They nest in trees, on the roofs of buildings that
house knowledge (observatories, sage houses, mage towers, li-
braries, laboratories), or in the wrecks of spelljammer ships.
(When space owls lair in a spelljammer shipwreck, they often try
to rebuild it.) An even number of owls in a parliament are mated
pairs. For each pair, there is a 20% chance of 1d4 owlets, or a
10% chance of 1d4 +1 eggs.

Space owls live for 100 +10d10 years. They are nocturnal, and
so they love the starry night sky of wildspace. Bright lights, such
as light spells, blind them. Space owls have exceptional hearing
and ultravision, the latter only usable at night.

 

 

 

All space owls have the Navigation proficiency, and they do
not suffer the —2 check modifier. There is a 45% chance that
trained space owls have 1d4 other proficiencies from the follow-
ing list: Ancient History, Animal Lore, Astrology, Engineering,
Reading Lips, Reading/Writing, and Spellcraft.

The owls’ sense of direction is 90% accurate, They can serve as
a ship's navigator, and they need no star charts when travelling in
their native sphere. The owls instinctively memorize the positions
of all heavenly bodies in their native crystal sphere. They can
learn the astronomical layouts of other crystal spheres, but this
requires at least one month of travel in the sphere, followed by an
Intelligence check. Studying an accurate map of the sphere, re-
duces study time to only 1d4 days, followed by the Intelligence
check. In either case, success means that the owl now knows that
sphere; failure means another month of travel or 1d4 days of map
study.

Besides navigation, space owls are adept at calculating plane-
tary orbits, debating philosophy or science, and even playing
chess. Their only drawback is an unfortunate tendency to ram-
ble, over-analyze, and use huge polysyllabic words.

Ecology: Space owls need only a little air to breathe; a few min-
utes in an atmosphere every couple of days keeps them happy.
They eat almost anything, including cooked food, wine, and
sweets. In the wild, they eat plants, insects, and small rodents.
Wizards who want a space ow] familiar must still cast the find
familiar spell, then persuade the ow! to become a familiar.
Pristatic

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Phlogiston

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: See below

INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (16)

TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic good

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 10 (without sphere)

MOVEMENT: 18

HIT DICE: 8+1

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: Nil

DAMAGE/ATTACK: Nil

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 50%

SIZE: S (3.5'); M (5') with sphere

MORALE: Steady (12); Elite (16) with
sphere

XP VALUE: 10,000

Pristatics resemble a sphere of swirling colors, much like the
prismatic sphere spell. Within the sphere is the actual pristatic, a
small gnome-like humanoid. While bereft of its sphere, the pris-
tatic floats in the phlogiston with legs and arms crossed, a look of
intense concentration on its face.

A long-standing legend maintains that pristatics were created
when a wizard attempted to alter the prismatic sphere spell by
combining it with a teleport spell (in order to drop a sphere into
the middle of a group). Unfortunately his assistant, a young
gnome, tripped and bolluxed the experiment, disappearing in the
process. A more reasonable conjecture is that the pristatic is na-
tive to the phlogiston; it may be a key to unknown secrets of
magic.

Combat: Pristatics avoid combat. Though adult pristatics in-
nately have all the abilities of the 9th-level wizard spell prismatic
sphere, they can use it only once per day, for a total of two hours
at most. Therefore, pristatics are willing to endure some damage
before resorting to this, their only means of defense.

The pristatic's colorful sphere is still visible even when not in
use. There is no way to detect whether the prismatic sphere effects
are currently active. Detect magic always registers the area as
magical, since it is composed of the ambient magical forces of the
phlogiston.

In contrast to the prismatic sphere spell, an adult pristatic can
activate some or all of its sphere’s layers. For example, the pris-
tatic can invoke the orange, indigo and violet effects, leaving out

 

     

the other colors. The pristatic selects these effects to inflict the
least harm to its opponent. Only when near death does it erect all
layers against attackers.

If characters converse with a pristatic, it answers any questions
it can. Pristatics are good observers and can remember the type
and bearing of all ships that have passed within about the last
month. However, the pristatic has no way to measure the passage
of time, making its recollections less helpful.

Pristatics cannot spelljam. They bob in the phlogiston, going
where the rainbow stream takes them.

Habitat/Society: Pristatics have no social structure, for they are
solitary beings. They prefer the vastness of the phlogiston over
the company of others.

Ecology: Innate magic in the phlogiston is food for the pristatic. If
brought into a crystal sphere, a pristatic’s life force rapidly fades,
and it dies within a day after leaving the phlogiston. Curative
magic doesn't help the pristatic, although placing it inside a wiz-
ard’s prismatic sphere prolongs its life for 24 hours. Similarly, if a
dying pristatic returns to the phlogiston before the 24 hours are
up, it returns to health in the same amount of time that it was
away from the phlogiston.

 

 

 
Scro

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Tribal
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Highly (13-14)
TREASURE: Z (J,K,M,Q)
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil
NO. APPEARING: 30-120
ARMOR CLASS: 4 (8)
MOVEMENT: 9 (12)

HIT DICE: 3

THACO: 18

NO. OF ATTACKS: I
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d6, or by weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 10%

SIZE: M to L (5-8' tall)
MORALE: Elite (15)

XP VALUE: 270
Sergeant/guard (4 HD): 420
Captain/bodyguard (6 HD): 975

Warpriest (5 HD): 975

Almighty Leader (8 HD): 2,000

The highly militaristic scro are a violent goblinoid race that has
only recently appeared. They are still rarely encountered, but if
present trends continue, wildspace travellers will unfortunately
see much more of them.

The scro resemble musclebound orcs, fully armored and armed
to the teeth. Scro have the orc’s characteristic pig-like snout;
however, the scro stand proud and erect, and their high foreheads
resemble humanity's. Scro have large canine teeth that they
sharpen to a fine point; they decorate teeth and ears with tribal
mini-totems. Scro eyes appear human, but they glow a sickly
phosphorescent green in dim light. Hide color ranges from slate
gray, burnt orange, light tan, and moss green, to jet black and
even, in rare cases, albino white.

Scro armor is well oiled, well maintained studded leather with
each stud filed to a sharp point. The armor is always jet black,
though the studs are painted different colors. Their numerous
weapons are just as well maintained. Scro often complete their
wardrobe with a night-blue cloak.

Scro carry no standards, but each scro wears an insignia that
identifies its tribe. This is worn either as a shoulder patch or on
the left side of the chest.

The scro speak a distant variant of the orcish tongue. Curi-
ously, some speak fluent elvish, for they have fanatically pre-
served the language of their worst enemies—so that when the scro
slaughter the elven race, the marauding humanoids can tell their
victims, in their own tongue, who is doing this to them.

Combat: The Scro live for combat. They have raised it to the
highest form of expression in their society. They fight easily in
any environment and are well disciplined. Though the scro can be
just as bloodthirsty as orcs, they have tempered their savagery
with pragmatism and strategic and tactical cunning. Scro actually
obey most of the civilized rules of warfare and do not fire on mes-
sengers or truce-bearers.

For every four scro encountered, there is one sergeant. For
every ten scro encountered, there is one captain and one war
priest. Only the largest gatherings of scro include an Almighty
Leader.

 

 

 

 

Scro use the following weapons: longsword and dagger (15%
of the time); scimitar (10%); arquebus and hand axe (25%); ar-
quebus and starwheel (5%); spear and hand axe (15%); polearm
and dagger (10%); shortbow and shortsword (15%); and cross-
bow and battleaxe (5%). Captains and bodyguards may also pos-
sess a starwheel firearm (75% chance). Almighty Leaders almost
always carry a starwheel. War priests, multi-classed Sth-level
cleric/mages, have one weapon with an enchantment between
+2 and +4, plus 1d4 miscellaneous magical items usable by
priests and wizards.

Sergeants and war priests get three melee attacks every two
rounds; captains and Almighty Leaders get two melee attacks per
round. These attacks are usable only with melee weapons or fists,
not missile weapons or firearms. Optionally, scro with two melee
weapons may be trained in two-weapon fighting (see The Com-
plete Fighter's Handbook for details).

The vast majority (95 % ) of scro warriors specialize in unarmed
combat, which gives them two punches per round at +1 to hit,
doing 1d3 damage per punch plus Strength bonuses. (Most adult
scro have at least Strength 16 and Constitution 15.) In addition,
some (30%) scro use a spiked leather glove that does an extra +1
hp damage in unarmed combat attacks.

Scro armor spikes cause 1d4 damage to any foe that the scro
smashes against. Some nasty scro coat their armor's studs and
spike with a Type D poison (5% chance); the poison’s onset takes
one minute and does 30 hp damage (save vs. poison for 2d6 dam-
age).

If all else fails, a scro bites with its powerful teeth for 1d3 dam-
age. If ascro kills an opponent with its teeth, the triumphant war-
rior affixes a small gem or bauble on one of its oversized canines.
It then takes a tooth from the opponent and puts it on a necklace
called a toregkh. This necklace is prized as a totem of strength. If
it is stolen, the warrior flies into a berserk rage against the of-
fender (+2 to hit and damage, +4 penalty to AC, number of at-
tacks per round doubled).

Strangely, the scro are notably articulate. They prefer to begin
Scro

combat by shouting long, literate insults against their opponents,
to show that they hold their enemies in contempt. The mere sight
of a goblinoid spouting offensive alliterations might disorient the
most battle-hardened veteran long enough to let the scro gain ini-
tiative in combat.

Direct sunlight does not affect scro combat ability.
Habitat/Society: Scro live in a regimented society, based on a
complex system of laws and customs that call for unswerving loy-
alty and obedience. Each scro is a valued member of society and
has a duty to fulfill.

Leaders are respected and obeyed unless they show obvious
cowardice in battle. In that case, it is the strongest scro’s duty to
overthrow the coward’s authority and lead the troops in glorious
battle.

The scro homeworld’s location is unknown. Thus far, they
have seldom ventured into civilized areas, preferring to keep out
of sight until they are truly ready. On the homeworld, Dukagsh,
the scro live in well-planned, spartan cities with stout towers,
strong fortresses, and efficient shipyards. Though the place is no
garden spot, neither is it smoky, ugly, or garbage-strewn. Each
city has 10,000 to 100,000 orcs.

Each of Dukagsh’s 24 tribes is led by an Almighty Leader. The
entire planet is ruled by the Ultimate High Overlord, a16 HD scro
who is guarded by 24 Captains, one from each tribe. Each tribe
has a social rank, with those of lower rank subordinate to the
higher tribes.

Scro soldiers train in non-weapon proficiencies and normally
have three of these skills: Armorer, Blindfighting, Endurance,
land-based Riding, Reading/Writing, Rope Use, Running, Track-
ing, and Weaponsmithing. Sergeants have four of these proficien-
cies; captains have five; war priests have four, plus Healing,
Herbalism, Religion, and Spellcraft.

Scro are not interested in conquering the multiverse. Their sole
purpose is to drive all groundling human, demi-human, and hu-
manoid races out of wildspace for good. The war priests see this,
not planetary conquest, as their holy mission. As for the races na-
tive to wildspace . . . well, the scro will need slave labor, and
those pitiful races will do quite nicely. The scro are merely wait-
ing for the right moment to strike.

Ecology: The scro have an “us against the whole multiverse” phi-
losophy that is sure to produce plenty of enemies when they make
their presence felt. Thus far, the scro know much about the other
space-faring races, but those races are unaware of the scro’s exist-
ence, save for a few rumors from unreliable sources.

Like their orcish forebears, scro are fecund. They produce lit-
ters of 1d4+1 offspring, most with an excellent chance of sur-
vival beyond infancy. Unlike their orcish ancestors, the scro live
for an average of 80 years.

History: The scro trace their ancestry back to the orc tribes that
fought and lost the Unhuman Wars. Some crews and troops of the
few surviving orc vessels made their way to a remote but habit-
able planet and settled down. This ragtag band was led by a huge
orc called Dukgash, who appointed himself the first Almighty
Leader.

 

By orc standards, Dukagsh was a visionary. He recognized that
the orcs lost the Unhuman Wars because of their one-dimensional
ideas and outmoded tactics. Brutality for its own sake had gotten
them nowhere. Dukagsh realized that the orcs needed to fight in
an organized way, and that each soldier must realize his full po-
tential.

In the ensuing years, Dukagsh whipped his people into shape,
making sure that they learned fighting, survival, and even cul-
ture, To make sure no one forgot who caused the orc’s misfortune,
each orc had to learn fluent elvish.

Sometimes, the orcs salvaged equipment from drifting space
junk, the remains of human, elven, dwarven, and goblinoid ships
from the Unhuman War battles. Occasionally they found books,
and Dukagsh made his people read them.

Before Dukagsh died, he declared that his people were on the
path to success, The old ways were dead, he claimed, and a new
race was born, a race that was more than any orc could ever be.
He named them the scro.

At his death, his grateful followers named their homeworld in
his honor. Dukagsh’s tomb now floats over the homeworld’s
north pole, so that the deceased leader may look down on his peo-
ple and watch their progress.

Scro Battlewagon

Built by: Scro

Armor Rating: 3

Used only by: Scro

Saves as: Metal

Tonnage: 80 tons

Power Type: Major helm

Hull points: 80

Ship’s Rating: 2

Crew: 40/160

Standard Armament: Blunt ram
4turret-mounted bombards Crew: 3 each
1 Greek fire projector Crew: 3 each
6 medium ballistae Crew: 2 each
8 medium catapults Crew: 3 each

Maneuver. Class: E

Cargo: 20 tons

Landing—Land: No

Keel Length: 150'

Landing—Water: No

Beam Length: 50’

The massive scro battlewagon symbolizes the scro’s emerging
power. Thus far, only four have been built: Decapitator, Devasta-
tor, Conflagrator, and Eviscerator. Two others, Mutilator and
Defenestrator, are under construction on Dukagsh.

 

 

 

 
Selkie, Star

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Wildspace/phlogiston
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary or tribal
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average to genius (8-18)
TREASURE: A (magic only), R
ALIGNMENT: Neutral good

NO. APPEARING: 1 or 10-20

ARMOR CLASS: 2 (prow —2), 10 in human form
MOVEMENT: Fly 12 (B), SR5

HIT DICE: 4

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d2 hull points or by weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Change to human form
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (5'-8' in either form)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)

XP VALUE: 270

Star selkies, though large and carnivorous, are actually an ethe-
real, shape-changing humanoid race. In their human form, they
are kind, gentle, individuals of remarkable beauty. Like terres-
trial selkies, they have striking green, blue, or black eyes, with
irises that sparkle with an inner light. Though somewhat absent-
minded, they are highly intelligent and well-versed in the lore of
wildspace.

Selkies may retain their human form for up to two weeks at a
time. In human form, the selkie communicates in both its own
language and Common. In flight, selkies understand spoken lan-
guage, but communicate among themselves in an unspoken
tongue that is as yet unknown.

It is said that star selkies originated from a group of Ptah wor-
shippers whose colony barge crashed on a barren asteroid. In an-
swer to their prayers of salvation, Ptah turned them into the
graceful, space-adapted selkies. However, there is only circum-
stantial evidence of this legend.

Combat: In flight, star selkies are savage, deadly fighters. Their
armored, bullet-shaped bodies have razor-sharp guide fins and a
prow sheathed in natural armor (AC 2). This armored prow does
1d2 hull points of damage. As high-speed battering rams, they
impale their prey. The selkie then extrudes ten tentacles that auto-
matically hit impaled victims. These tentacles, tipped with
lamprey-like mouths, attach to the victims and drain 1 hit point
per round. A successful Bend Bars/Lift Gates roll destroys one
tentacle. A victim can roll to destroy a tentacle once per round.

Star selkies use an inborn ability similar to a fly spell to move in
any direction, as slowly as a walking human (MV 12) or as fast as
a seasoned spelljammer (SR 5).

Habitat/Society: Star selkie communities resemble their terres-
trial counterparts. Both sexes hunt and gather food and share re-
sponsibilities for child-rearing. If anything, star selkies are more
gregarious than their sea-going kin, occasionally even settling

 

 

 

 

larger human habitations in selkie enclaves. The selkie
tion for scavenging space wrecks has proven to be very useful to
them. A number of selkie merchants deal in “reclaimed goods.”

Though primarily carnivorous, selkies consider eating human-
oid flesh an act of cannibalism. They prefer to eat the wildlife of
wildspace, and do not normally attack spelljamming ships (ex-
cept in self defense). On the contrary, star selkies sometimes help
lost travelers, leading them to safe, well-charted areas.

The selkie leaders can cast the following spells once per day:
create air, charm monster, cure critical wounds, and sunray.
They also have an ability similar to a modified stone shape spell
that allows them to construct their enclaves. The leader casts
these spells as a 8th-level wizard.

Ecology: Though the star selkie is a carnivore, it is sensitive to
over-hunting of its habitat. Trade with ground dwellers supple-
ments its diet. The star selkie population has increased slightly,
but their birthrate is still low.

Star selkies have a special gland that produces oxygen, allow-
ing them to travel in space as long as there is food to eat. This
gland does not function properly until the selkie’s third year of
life, so selkie habitats (called “enclaves”) must be air-filled.

Star selkies occasionally attract and take human mates. Off-
spring of such a pairing breed true as selkies. Such mixed colonies
are easy to spot, for the enclaves sport intricate freeform surface
dwellings to accommodate the human mates. These surface
dwellings tend to be large Egyptian-style structures, lending fur-
ther credence to the theory of Ptah-worshipping ancestry.
Silatic

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Platinum Gold
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Space Space
FREQUENCY: Rare Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary Solitary Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any Any
DIET: See below See below See below
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5) Low (5) Low (5)
TREASURE: L(x10) M(x10) J(x10)
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Neutral Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1 1 1
ARMOR CLASS: 3 9 5
MOVEMENT: 6 12 6
HIT DICE: 10+1 9+1 6+1
THACO: 11 11 15
NO. OF ATTACKS: 2 3 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d6 +7 1d6+4 1d6+7
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: +1 or better weapons to hit
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 30% 30% 75%
SIZE: M (6’) M (6') M (6’)
MORALE; Steady (12) Steady (12) Steady (12)
XP VALUE: 4000 3000 975

Silatics are amorphous blobs, 5-7’ in diameter, that eat metal.
Continuously shifting and quivering, they use their two pseudo-
pods to test substances for edibility. The silatic’s diet consists
solely of the metal they are made of. For example, a platinum si-
latic eats only platinum. Silatics innately detect the metal they eat
within a 100’ range.

Silatics hide well, for they can stretch as thin as 1" thick. They
need no air to survive and prefer wildspace to planets. In wild-
space they are almost graceful, fanning their thinned bodies to
move slowly. As soon as gravity takes hold, though, gracefulness
disappears; their pseudopods pull them along the ground.

Combat: The silatic’s two pseudopods administer bludgeoning
damage of 1d6+4. Each adult silatic's pseudopod can extend to
50'. They attack only if disturbed while eating or prevented from
feeding. Usually, one pseudopod remains attached to the food
while the other attacks an opponent. If injured, the silatic
detaches from the food source and attacks the offender with both
pseudopods.

There are three known types of silatics: gold, platinum, and
iron. (A fourth, silver, is rumored.) Each has a special attack.

Iron— +3 bonus to damage; high magic resistance.

Gold—moves faster than other silatics, gaining one extra at-
tack per round.

Platinum— +3 bonus to damage; also, the platinum silatic
coats its pseudopod with acid. If it hits, the character takes an ad-
ditional 2d8 damage (save vs. poison for half damage).

A silatic eats by attaching a pseudopod to its meal, excreting a
liquid that dissolves the metal, and absorbing it through the skin.
It takes three rounds to administer the liquid and three to absorb
the liquefied metal. The liquid is harmless to living beings. Metal
of the silatic’s type saves vs. acid at —5. Metal not of the silatic’s
type saves at —2.

If a silatic senses metal within a wooden-hulled ship, it first
tries to sneak aboard. If this fails, it batters a hole in the ship near
the metal inside. Against metal ships, a silatic inflicts 1 hull point
per turn; against wood, it inflicts normal combat damage.

Habitat/Society: Silatics are solitary, avoiding other beings by
hiding in “uninhabitable” places. Silatics of the same type exhibit
instant hostility and fight to the death.

 

Gravs and most space miners kill silatics on sight. Residents of
inhabited worlds hunt down silatics relentlessly. Once a gold si-
latic got into the gold reserves of a major city, reproduced, and
soon dozens were oozing around, searching for more gold to de-
vour. The entire city’s economy collapsed because gold became
too scarce—all because of one hungry silatic.

Ecology: Silatics have no spelljamming ability. To move from
world to world, they stow away on ships, often on the outer hull.

When a silatic absorbs enough metal (around 100 Ibs), it seeks
out an uninhabited area and splits in two. The two new silatics,
each 3 1/2’ wide, are dazed and instinctively move in opposite di-
rections. Five hours after splitting, they regain their senses and
search for food. If the reproduction occurs in a confined space,
the two silatics fight to the death upon regaining their senses.

If a silatic is killed, only the metal eaten in the last week can be
recovered (usually 1d10 Ibs per Hit Die). All other material dis-
solves into a jelly-like substance.

 

 

 

 

 
Skullbird

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Flock
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Semi- (2)
TREASURE: R
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: 2-5
ARMOR CLASS: 2
MOVEMENT: 6, FI9(C)
HIT DICE: 6+6
THACO: 14

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d8/1d8/3d4
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Grab prey
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Slippery
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: L (16’ wingspan)
MORALE: Irregular (7)
XP VALUE: 1400

Skullbirds are large carrion birds of wildspace. A bad reputation
follows these birds. Sailors consider the sight of a skullbird a sign
that someone aboard ship will die soon.

The birds are named for their gruesome heads, which appear to
be bird skulls covered with a layer of shiny black skin stretched
tight. Their glittering dark eyes are hidden deep in the recessed
sockets, and their beaks are jet black and needle-sharp, Skullbirds
are covered with oily black feathers and exude an oily, charnel
odor. Their talons are like razors.

Skullbirds have no language, but have two distinct calls: an ir-
ritating, high-pitched screech when they find live food, and an
ominous, bass croaking when they find carrion.

Combat: Though the birds prefer to eat carrion, since it puts up
no fight, they unhesitatingly attack live prey if they have not had
a decent meal in several days (50% chance).

Skullbirds attack with their two sets of sharp talons, each do-
ing 1d8 damage. If the prey is still moving, they try to finish it off
with a swift stroke of their razor-like beaks, inflicting 3d4 dam-
age.

Whenever a skullbird attacks a victim who weighs less than 200
pounds, it tries to snatch up its prize and fly away to its foul nest.
To do so, the skullbird must hit the victim with both claws in the
same melee round. The talons have an effective Strength of 17.
The victim is allowed a Strength check to escape; failure means
the bird swoops up with the victim at top speed. If the prey strug-
gles for more than one round, the skullbird drops the victim, in
hopes that the falling damage will finish it off.

Skullbirds secrete an oily substance that keeps them comfort-
able while flying in space. The oil is slippery; any attempt to grap-
ple with the bird takes a —4 penalty. This oil is also responsible
for the creature's low AC, since weapons seem to slip off the bird.

The oil, however, is highly flammable, giving the skullbirds a
— 4 penalty when saving vs. fire-based attacks, and +2 hp per die
of fire damage. Waving torches or other open flames around a
skullbird for one round forces a morale check.

Habitat/Society: Skullbirds nest in floating wrecks of spelljam-
ming vessels, or in the decomposing bodies of huge, dead, wild-
space creatures. They travel in flocks and have no leaders.
Skullbirds are not territorial.

 

 

 

 

 

Once every three months, a female skullbird lays 1d4 eggs.
Ugly, almost skeletal chicks hatch from the eggs and begin croak-
ing incessantly, demanding to be fed. The sound is reminiscent of
a group of bullfrogs. There is a 25% chance of finding skullbird
eggs in a nest. They are not edible.

The oily feathers of the skullbird also trap air most efficiently,
giving the birds a full day’s supply of air. They do require air to
survive in wildspace.

The skullbird is a bird of ill omen. Sailors shun them, and shun
anyone foolish enough to wear anything made from part one of
the birds. If a ship encounters skullbirds outside their lair, the
encounter begins with the birds flying out of nowhere and trying
to perch on the ship's masts. This is considered the worst possible
omen, a sign that the ship will soon be destroyed. Fast-moving
characters get one round to try to drive the birds away from the
masts; if they succeed, the birds may attack instead (50%
chance).

Average or Green crews who see the skullbirds roosting on
their ships undergo an immediate morale check at —1 penalty.
Failure indicates that the sailors immediately panic, some scam-
pering below decks, others jumping off the ship. They remain
panicked until the birds are driven off. More experienced crews
need not check morale, but they make morale checks in later bat-
tles at the same penalty.

Ecology: The only positive ecological contribution skullbirds
make is their pursuit of their favorite food, feesu (q.v.).
Sleek

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Solitary/tribal
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Nocturnal
DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: None
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1-10

ARMOR CLASS: 3
MOVEMENT: 36

HIT DICE: 2+1

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4/1d4/2d6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Sever vein on 19-20
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: T (1-3')
MORALE: Steady (12)
XP VALUE: 65

Sleeks are ermine-like mammals with bright, black eyes. Anten-
nae on their muzzles aid them in gauging both the size and dis-
tance of their prey. Though independent, they occasionally seek
human and demihuman companionship.

Combat: The sleek’s speed and silent motion make it all but invisi-
ble (surprise on 1-5 on 1dé6). In combat against man-sized or
larger adversaries, the sleek uses its antennae to sense vital areas
in an opponent, then attacks with its claws and razor sharp teeth.
The sleek’s claws do 1d4 points of damage. Man-sized or larger
targets suffer 2d6 points of damage.

A roll of 20 indicates that the sleek has opened a major blood
vessel, causing a halfling-sized or larger victim to lose 1d6 hp per
minute through bleeding. First aid, such as a tourniquet or direct
pressure, stops this hp loss, as does healing magic. Smaller targets
must save vs. death. Failure means the victim dies immediately,
its spinal cord severed.

Their fast metabolism, coupled with an extremely powerful
and efficient digestive tract, renders sleeks immune to poison.
This also lets them consume poisonous or exotic flesh—even flesh
golems are not safe!

Sleeks sometimes act in concert against large prey. This ability
to cooperate, combined with their berserker-like battle frenzy
(+4 to hit), makes them formidable enemies to shipboard “pests.”

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Sleeks inhabit cargo holds and small ship pas-
sageways. If coaxed with food they can be domesticated (30%
chance),

Their large, bright eyes, silvery-white fur, and sensitive anten-
nae mark them as onetime cave dwellers, but their adaptations
pose no handicap to them in the light. Sleeks mate for life, pro-
ducing litters of 1d4 young once a year, A family of sleeks may
occupy a “territory,” but conflict between sleek territories is rare.

In lean times sleeks also exact “tribute” from ship crews. In-
stead of helping themselves to foodstuffs, they play tricks, steal
clothes and precious items, and generally make nuisances of
themselves until the crew formally offers food. Simply leaving
food for them is not good enough; the “insulted” sleeks demand a
show of submission. For instance, the captain must roll on his or
her back in full view of the sleeks. Only then is the sleeks’ honor

satisfied. This behavior earns them the name “pirate-masters.”

Ecology: Sleeks live about 20 years. Young stay with their parents
for two years, whereupon they leave to establish territories of
their own. Those individuals who adopt humans remain with
them for life as staunch allies.

 

 

 
Sluk

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Wildspace and phlogiston
FREQUENCY: Common
ORGANIZATION: Bed
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Wood, magic
INTELLIGENCE: Non- (0)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 8
MOVEMENT: 3

HIT DICE: 5

THACO: 16

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: Special
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Special
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Special
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: G (50 +' diameter patches)
MORALE: Nil

XP VALUE: 420

Sluk is wildspace seaweed, with the same ship-miring ability as
sargasso seaweed in planetary seas. An unintelligent parasite, it
feeds on magical energy.

Sluk is a dark blue weed with small silver nodules in its leaves.
It drifts in 50’ long, stringy clumps called “beds,” waiting for ships
to run into it. Its coloration acts as near-perfect camouflage in
wildspace (only 5% chance that lookouts see it). In the phlogis-
ton, the plant is easy to spot.

Combat: If a spellcaster or anyone carrying three or more magical
items falls into a sluk bed, the seaweed wraps itself around the
victim. If it scores a hit, the sluk contracts with Strength 18 as it
leeches magical energy, inflicting 1d6 damage per round. Drain-
ing effects on magical items are described below.

Sluk can mire spelljamming vessels. Each 50 square feet of sluk
bed can stop five tons of vessel; the bed’s area is 2d10 * 50 square
feet.

If the vessel is moving at spelljamming speeds when it runs into
a sluk bed big enough to stop it, the ship immediately decelerates
to tactical speed, requiring all aboard to make a Dexterity check
or lose their balance and fall. A vessel travelling at tactical speed
through a sluk bed gradually slows to a halt, losing 1/4 of its origi-
nal speed and maneuverability each round until it stops.

Once a vessel stops in a sluk bed, the only way to get moving
again is to chop away the strands. This takes 1d6 +3 rounds.

Sluk is completely immune to magic, except for cold-based
spells. Magical cold instantly causes the plant to shrivel up and
flake off. Other spells merely nourish the sluk. If a total of 10 spell
levels are cast at the sluk, it reproduces as detailed below.

Habitat/Society: Sluk is attracted to sources of magic and moves
towards them much as a groundling sunflower turns to face the
sun.

 

 

 

 

 

Ecology: Sluk reproduces by adhering to a trapped spelljamming
hull and bleeding its magical energy. (The hull must be wood;
metal hulls are immune to the bleeding, though they are still
trapped.) Subtract the trapped vessel's SR from 10; the result is
the number of rounds (minimum 1) the sluk must hold the ship
motionless to reproduce. Thus, a vessel with SR 4 lets the plant
reproduce in six rounds. Sluk can only bleed motionless ships.

In reproducing, the sluk doubles the size of its patch, possibly
miring the ship even deeper in the bed. At DM's option, the crew
must spend 1d6 extra rounds cutting away strands.

Drain effects: The sluk temporarily reduces a trapped spell-
jammer’'s SR by 1 per round (minimum 1). Ignore this temporary
reduction when figuring how long the sluk takes to reproduce; al-
ways use the ship's original SR instead. The ship regains 1 SR per
hour once it escapes from the sluk. Once a ship is reduced to SR 1,
it no longer feeds the sluk enough energy to permit reproduction.
At DM’s discretion, spelljamming helms may lose their power
permanently after months in the sluk.

Magical items lose one charge per round; permanent magical
items lose their magic after one hour in the sluk, but recover their
powers within 1d10 turns if removed before then. Relics and arti-
facts are not affected.

Feesu and skullbirds (qq.v.) enjoy an occasional nibble of sluk,
but not enough to make a difference.
Space Swine

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Herd
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Semi- (3)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral good
NO. APPEARING: 1-4
ARMOR CLASS: 5
MOVEMENT: 9, Fl12
HIT DICE: 4+4
THACO: 16

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2d4
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: S (3' at shoulder)
MORALE: Steady (11)
XP VALUE: 420

The space swine are a species of boar, custom-bred by the mer-
cantile dohwar (q.v.) for a variety of uses. They serve primarily
as trackers, since they have uncanny senses.

Standing three feet at the shoulder and six feet long, the space
swine also sport a pair of huge grey wings, resembling a pigeons.
The wings span about eight feet. A single blunt horn juts out six
inches from the space swine’s thick skull. The normal space swine
coloration is a dirty or mottled brown. Space swine of remark-
able lineage or belonging to influential dohwar may be pure white
or black. Space swine grunt like pigs and sometimes coo like pi-
geons. Judging by the dohwar's irritation, some speculate that the
pigs are not supposed to coo.

Besides tracking, space swine also serve as beasts of burden,
food, and (rarely) mounts. Though the dohwar are proud of their
porcine creations, the other intelligent races consider the pigs an
insane idea and nickname them “star pork.”

Combat: Despite their odd appearance, space swine are fierce
fighters, as ill-tempered as wild boars. The space swine's nasty
bite does 2d4 damage.

As a war mount, the space swine is trained to attack with its
horn. If a space swine and his dohwar rider have at least 120’ be-
tween themselves and their foe, the space swine can make a high-
speed dive. During the dive, the space swine emits a piercing
war-squeal that rises in pitch as it nears the target. Make an attack
roll for the space swine to hit its target. If the space swine hits, its
500-pound weight does 2d10 crushing damage, and its horn im-
pales for an additional 1d10 damage. After a hit, the space swine
save vs. breath weapon or drop unconscious for 1d4 rounds with
a light concussion. The riding dohwar, of course, is thrown.

A space swine war mount can follow up to a dozen commands.
These commands can be sign language or simple phrases. Though
the space swine cannot speak, it recognizes its given name and its
rider. If a space swine loses its rider in battle but has a chance to
rescue the rider, the pig flies away fast (though it feels really bad
about this and misses its rider terribly).

Habitat/Society: Space swine are raised in herds. A litter of space
swine consists of 3d4 sucklings. Only the strong become war
mounts. All space swine are rather good-natured, and do not pick
fights, though adult space swine band together to defend suck-
lings from predators.

 

 

 

 

 

Space swine are clean animals, preening their wings to keep
them in good shape and airworthy. On hot planets, space swine
enjoy rolling around in mud to cool off.

Muscular animals, space swine can bear 400 pounds of weight
with no encumbrance penalty. Despite their bulk, they are sure-
footed, A space swine retains enough air for itself for 24 hours, or
18 hours with a rider.

Space swine are uncanny trackers. If allowed to sniff a piece of
a person’s clothing, or a sample of some sort of material, the space
swine can track the person or material in question with a Tracking
proficiency level of 18. The material can be anything from gold to
silver to water to truffles. Once on the scent, the space swine
tracks relentlessly to the source; nothing stops it but fatigue, in-
jury, or trickery.

In wildspace, a space swine can find a scent up to 48,000 miles
away. This distance drops by 2,000 miles for every hour of the
scent's age. Thus, if a dohwar wished to track down a particular
vessel that passed within 10,000 miles of the dohwar 12 hours
ago, the space swine could pick up the scent. To determine suc-
cess, use the space swine’s Tracking proficiency level of 18.

Space swine also taste delicious, roasted with applesauce on the
side.

Ecology: Space swine can eat anything, and they manage to fulfill
some small role in gobbling up space garbage tossed by passing
ships. Other than this, the space swine have no real use except to
the dohwar.

The dohwar try to market space swine as an all-in-one animal
for the knowledgeable explorer, but apparently those explorers
have enough knowledge not to believe this. The only ones who
purchase space swine in great numbers are the tinker gnomes,
who think that space swine are “a brilliant idea.”

In desperation, the dohwar also try to sell space swine to space-
going halflings, billing them as “dependable mounts, strong
beasts of burden, and they make a tasty mid-afternoon snack.”
Thus far, the strategy has failed.

 

 

 
Spirit Warrior

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Spirit warrior Zwarth
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any Any
FREQUENCY: Very rare Very rare
ORGANIZATION: N/A N/A
ACTIVITY CYCLE: N/A N/A
DIET: N/A N/A
INTELLIGENCE: Non-(0) Non-(0)
TREASURE: Nil Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral good Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1-200 1-5
ARMOR CLASS: -5 -8
MOVEMENT: 15, Fl 24 18, F124, SR3
HIT DICE: Master's +10 Master's +20
THACO: Varies Varies
NO. OF ATTACKS: Varies Equals master’s at-

tacks

DAMAGE/ATTACK: — 3d6/3d6 or by weapon type —
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil Special
SIZE: H (20') G (30 +")
MORALE: Varies Varies
XP VALUE: 6000 7000

The spirit warrior is an enormous undead insect, the primary
long-range weapon of elven crack troops during the Unhuman
Wars. All Spirit Warriors went into time storage after the end of
the Unhuman Wars, and they occasionally emerge in modern
times.

A fighter operates the spirit warrior from a cavity inside the
chest. This is the spirit warrior’s master (also called a spirit war-
rior, as the two become essentially one).

Spirit warriors are of three types: carnivores, herbivores, and
nektars. Carnivores descend from the praying mantis. They have
its slashing, grasping forelimbs and biting mandibles. Their wings
bear eye-spots that they reflexively display before combat.

Herbivores are based on the katydid. Though they are thin and
spindly in build, their powerful legs carry them 600' forward or
backward, and up to 400’ vertically. Their wings and limbs are
leaf-shaped.

Nektars descend from an insect similar to both a butterfly anda
wasp. Nektar spirit warriors are brightly colored, with iridescent
thoraxes and alternating bands of color on their abdomens. Their
wings are large and colorful, with various patterns.

All breeds of spirit warrior have at least two clawed hands, feet
that adhere to any surface, and functional wings that enable them
to make gliding leaps of 100-600’ on planets. They also wield var-
ious melee weapons scaled to their size.

Combat: A spirit warrior’s number of attacks depends on its mas-
ter's ability—for instance, a 1st-level fighter attacks once per
round, so his spirit warrior can only attack once per round. Con-
versely, a 12th-level fighter’s spirit warrior can attacks three times
every two rounds. Most spirit warriors attack with a giant long-
sword, doing triple normal damage (3d8). Some warriors use spe-
cial bows with a range of 500 yards. The arrows do triple normal
damage (3d6); there is a 5% chance that one arrow is an arrow of
slaying. All spirit warriors can deliver two claw attacks for 3d6
per claw, in lieu of the weapon strike.

The various species also have different attacks, as follows:

Carnivores bite for 5d6é damage. The forelimbs of the carnivore
spirit warrior can grapple an opponent on a successful attack roll,
inflicting 1d6 crushing damage each round thereafter. A success-
ful grapple immobilizes a smaller opponent, and later attacks hit

  

 

 

 

 

automatically. A grappled opponent gets a Strength ability check
each round to break free.

Herbivores can change color like a chameleon, becoming al-
most invisible to an opponent (surprise on 1-4 on 1d6). Their
screech attack does 2d10 sonic damage per round. The herbivore
uses its leaping ability to jump over its opponent, somersaulting
in midair to land and strike from behind ( +2 to hit when the mas-
ter makes a successful Dexterity check).

Nektars have a smooth wasp-like stinger. In life, a gland pumps
a poison through the stinger, inflicting a painful wound. The
spirit warrior has a hollow stinger outfitted with a small greek fire
projector with 1d3 shots. The stinger can fire every other round
for 3d6 damage at a range of 50 yards.

The spirit warrior body “remembers” its previous existence as a
living insect and confers its sense of absolute balance to the mas-
ter, making disorientation impossible.

The bonding between the spirit warrior and its master means
that damage to the spirit warrior is relayed to the master. In the
event of a critical hit, the master must save vs. death. Failure
means both spirit warrior and master die from shock.

Habitat/Society: Spirit warriors are weapons from the Unhuman
Wars. There are three ways to acquire one: find one that has been
abandoned, wrest one from its owner in combat, or grow one
from an egg and perform the appropriate spells. Since the Wars
ranged over a great area, the chance of finding an abandoned
warrior is small. Also, those still piloted have most likely been
around since the time of the Wars, so wresting one from its master
in combat is also unlikely. This leaves the method of growing one
from an egg, as follows:

The would-be spirit warrior receives an egg. The fighter must
incubate the pinhead-sized egg in a warm and secure environ-
ment, preferably next to the fighter’s body. When the egg hatches,
the warrior must nurture and protect the fragile larva from six
months to a year, until it is mature. This nurturing involves close
emotional contact with the insect (stroking, petting, cuddling,
Spirit Warrior

thinking pleasant thoughts) to develop a strong emotional bond
as one would with a pet or familiar. After a year the insect is ma-
ture, and the spells of modification begin; however, for the
strongest bond, this final process is delayed until after the insect
has died of old age. If the spells are performed on a living insect, it
dies during the ceremony.

The insect becomes a spirit warrior via spells that enlarge, ani-
mate, strengthen, and physically modify the insect’s remains.
These spells also link the minds of warrior and insect in an un-
breakable bond, unaffected by magic, disease, physical attack, or
mental control. The final stage of the process installs a special mi-
nor helm in the hollow chest cavity of the insect warrior.

There is a base 5% chance that the discoverer of an abandoned
warrior can forge a new bond with it. Alignment affects this
chance, for warriors created for the Unhuman Wars were of either
good or neutral alignment (law and chaos were of no conse-
quence). If the discoverer’s alignment differs from the warrior’s,
the bonding chance decreases 1% for each degree of difference—
for example, if the spirit warrior is good in alignment and the
finder is neutral, the chance of bonding drops to 4%; if the finder
is evil, the chance drops to 3%.

If the 5% chance fails, the effects on the discoverer who at-
tempted the bond range from devastating to deadly. Roll percen-
tile dice and consult this table.

 

Die Roll Effect

01-25 unconscious for 1d3 days

26-85 stroke (cerebral hemmorhage); victim incapacitated.
DM's choice of specific effects: loss of motor skills,
speech impairment, etc.

86-00 Death due to massive stroke and psychic trauma.

The reason for such severe results is the bonding process itself.
The process effects physical changes on the would-be spirit war-
rior's brain and nervous system. When the bonding takes place
between an insect and its keeper, the links are easily forged due to
the years of intimate contact. For a stranger to attempt such a
bonding is dangerous indeed.

Ecology: This is only important when the spirit warrior larva is
being nurtured. Nektars and herbivores feed on one or two spe-
cific types of flowering plants. Growing these flowers requires a
hothouse. An insect can eat up to 30 times its body weight in a
day.

Carnivores also develop preferences and are more insistent.
The master may grow anxious when the insect is hungry, resulting
in mood swings and irrational behavior (for instance, drastic re-
ductions in the local space hamster population) in both master
and insect.

During the Unhuman Wars, elvish mages created the warriors
as armored, super-strong weapons to counter orcish monsters be-
ing released on various worlds. At first their years of research
only worked up to a point: the giant undead insects ran amok,
killing researchers and damaging Armada Noble itself.

An assistant, Rowan Starblade by name, discovered that the
ceremonies failed because the researchers and the insects shared
no emotional bond. When one of Rowan’s “pet” research insects
rampaged after the ill-fated ceremony, she threw herself in front
of the beast, begging it to stop. To her surprise, the giant insect
obeyed her command!

Further experimentation with Rowan’s pet zombie revealed
that when she welded a modified minor helm in the insect's hol-
low chest cavity with gold and platinum wire, she could sit in the
helm and pilot the insect with her speed and agility, and with the
insect’s strength.

Zwarth

This large version of the spirit warrior, piloted by crews of 5-8
people, has as many attacks per round as it has crew members. It
is capable of true spelljamming flight and can use many weapons.
The zwarth has the magical power of spell projection. A spell-
caster in a zwarth can amplify attack spells, doing a spell’s dice of
damage in hull points. For instance, if an ordinary magic missile
does 1d4+1 points of damage, then the same magic missile, cast
through the zwarth’s hands, would do 1d4 +1 hull points of dam-
!
ne wrartit construction resembles that of a spirit warrior. Growth
and bonding processes are the same. (Yes, an entire party must
undergo this process!)

 

 

 

 

 
Sphinx, Astro

 

& CLIMATE/TERRAIN:

 

 

 

 

 

 

Any
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Highly (13-14)
TREASURE: A
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1
ARMOR CLASS: 4
MOVEMENT: 18, Fl 24
HIT DICE: 9
THACO: 12
NO. OF ATTACKS: 5
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2d6/2d6/4d6/1d6/1d6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Chain lightning
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 25%
SIZE: L (12' at shoulder)
MORALE: Fanatic (18)
XP VALUE: 6,000

Astrosphinxes are a malevolent breed of sphinx whose origins are
shrouded in mystery. Standing twice as tall as a man, the astro-
sphinx is covered with brass-colored scales like those of a dragon.
A pair of huge black bat wings sprouts from its back. The head re-
sembles a goat skull, with tiny pinpricks of violet light in its eye
sockets. The head does in fact have flesh; it is just so pale, and
stretched so tightly across the skull, that it seems invisible. In-
stead of forepaws, the astrosphinx has a pair of large, clawed hu-
man hands. The beast exudes a smell of ozone and offal.

These frightful creations, parodies of true sphinxes, speak the
language of all sphinxes and the Common tongue.

Combat: An astrosphinx uses its two goat horns to attack with a
head-butt, each horn doing 1d6 damage. It can bite viciously (4d6
damage). Its human hands have large claws that do 1d6 damage
each. In rare instances (5% of the time), the creature wields a two-
handed sword, sometimes magical.

Though the creature has a draconian body, it cannot use its tail
or hind legs in combat. It does, however, breathe a cone of sleep
gas 80’ long, 4' wide at the beast's mouth and 20’ wide at the base.
Targets caught in the cone must save vs. breath weapon or fall
asleep for 1d6 turns. Victims in wildspace in their own air bubbles
remain asleep until the gas is somehow flushed out of the air sup-
ply. The astrosphinx can employ this breath weapon once every
five rounds.

Finally, the astrosphinx can shoot a 9d6 chain lightning bolt
from its eye sockets. There is a one-round delay before hurling
the bolt, and a resting of the eyes for one round afterwards. On
the round before the bolt fires, the pinpoints of light in the astros-
phinx's eye sockets change color from violet to gold. On the
round after the bolt is fired, the eyes change to red. At the end of
that round, the eyes change back to their normal violet, which
means that the eyes have recharged.

The disadvantage to the sphinx’s lightning weapon is that it is
blind for the one round of rest. The sphinx suffers a — 4 penalty to
THACO in melee combat during the round of eye rest.

In melee combat, the astrosphinx attacks homicidally, mind-
lessly until nothing living still stands. As a rule, after its riddle is
answered incorrectly (see below), the sphinx breathes its sleep
gas, shoots the lightning, then hurls itself into melee. The astro-
sphinx attacks not only the person who got the riddle wrong, but
all companions as well.

 

 

     

 

EL:

 

Habitat/Society: Astrosphinxes are fiercely territorial and chal-
lenge all intruders to a contest of riddles. Those who answer in-
correctly, or do not answer at all, are killed outright. Due to their
dementia, the astrosphinxes challenge any living things, even
birds, bugs, small animals, and plants.

The madness of the astrosphinxes renders their riddles unan-
swerable and illogical: “What is the speed of blue?” “How loud is
down?" “What do a kobold and the Spelljammer have in common
besides triangles?” Unfortunately, an astrosphinx slays anyone
who does not answer its riddle correctly; so, an astrosphinx is
usually the only creature on a given planet.

Some travellers, legend states, have solved an astrosphinx’s
mad riddle by giving an equally mad or nonsensical answer. This
tactic seldom works (1% chance of success). Legend says that if
an astrosphinx’s riddle is answered correctly, the beasts erupts
into a 20d6 ring of chain lightning, killing itself. Supposedly all
that is left is a clue to the whereabouts of the Spelljammer.

The astrosphinx can survive in space without air. It lairs most
often on small, barren chunks of rock. The sphinx eats anything,
usually those who give wrong answers to its riddles.

Ecology: The astrosphinx is a bizarre predator that all conscien-
tious races believe is better off hunted down and killed. Not even
the evil intelligent races have anything to do with it. Saving any
piece of an astrosphinx as a trophy is considered a bad omen, and
the owner of the grisly trophy winds up shunned by his fellows.
Starfly Plant

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Wildspace, phlogiston
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: N/A
INTELLIGENCE: Non- (0)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1-100
ARMOR CLASS: 10
MOVEMENT: 18

HIT DICE: 0
THACO: N/A
NO. OF ATTACKS: 0
DAMAGE/ATTACK: )
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil
SIZE: S (2' long)
MORALE: Nil

XP VALUE: Nil

This colorful butterfly-shaped plant drifts slowly through wild-
space, much to the delight of spelljammer crews—its fruit is deli-
cious! Spelljammers consider the starfly plant an omen of good
luck, since it not only ends hunger but also symbolizes wealth and
happiness.

The gossamer wings of the starfly trap sunlight, converting it
to sugary food for the seed nestled inside. Similar to a peach pit,
the warty, almond-shaped seed contains foul-tasting chemicals
poisonous to living things.

Ecology: The starfly is actually the mobile fruit of a spacefaring
plant, a tree that grows to maturity rooted in the ice and dirt of
comets. Known as a mother-tree, it grows winged fruits that drift
across space in search of new comets to seed.

The starfly's shape resembles elven spacecraft, leading scholars
to suppose (correctly) that elves took these plants and enchanted
them to grow to maturity while mobile, thus creating variants
such as the gadabout (q.v) and the elven armada ship. In truth,
the starfly is the mainstay of spacegoing elvenkind, since its sim-
ple form is so easily changed.

Mother-tree: This plant is the mature form of the starfly. Once
the fruit has landed on a comet, the seed takes root and begins to
digest the cometary ice and minerals. The sapling grows winglike
leaves that take in sunlight. After a time, the young tree develops
a bulb that stores water. At this stage, the leaves become reflec-
tive, focusing sunlight on the bulb and heating the water within.
The resulting steam jets out of the bulb nozzles, pushing comet

 

 
      
   

\ \ Ween en
ANY yh nf
y We
\

\

™~

s y/

/ sb

= Se
Ba Oe,

 

 

1
oa!
and plant closer to the sun. Once the tree is close enough, the
leaves fall away, and the second stage of life begins.

In this phase, the tree feeds on the remaining minerals of the
comet. By the time they are gone, the tree is large enough to gen-
erate a gravity plane and hold an air envelope. As the tree grows,
its gravity plane attracts rocks and debris into the tree's organic
furnace, further aiding the tree's growth. When the tree has
grown to about 1000 feet, the smelting pods wither, giving off
gases that create air.

New growth begins, dense clusters of leaves that form a habitat
for animals and other plants. When the tree matures, it is a fully
functioning ecology. The tree's gravity may pull in other rock
bodies, supporting further growth and eventually creating a live-
world.

It is rumored that elven wizards have used secret spells to
mount special helms into mother-trees for use as spelljammers.
The rumor says that the giant trees will succeed the armadas as
the mainstays of the elven space fleet. As yet the rumor remains
unproven, but rivals of the elves would pay a great deal to any-
one who can confirm it.

 

 

 

 
Stargazer

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Wildspace/ asteroids
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Diurnal

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: See below
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1-2

ARMOR CLASS: —2(8)
MOVEMENT: 12 (Roll 24)
HIT DICE: 6+2

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 (1)
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d8/1d8/4d6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Electric bolt (5d6 x 2)
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Stone hide
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: L (18’ tall)
MORALE: Steady (12-13)
XP VALUE: 3,000

The stargazer is a large, four-legged reptilian asteroid-dweller. Its
rocky skin mimics crystalline outcroppings, giving it an AC of
=72.

The stargazer is often mistaken for a large lump of precious
stone amid a larger stone formation or on the ground. The stony,
gemlike carapace hides a frog-like mouth lined with razor-sharp
teeth, as well as four sharp claws which are kept folded under the
stargazer's body.

The hide absorbs sunlight, both to warm the beast’s body and
to power the beast’s main weapon, lightning discharges. Hides
show a variety of colors and crystalline formations, but generally
they are reddish or violet, suggesting deposits of ruby or ame-
thyst. Citrine, emerald and sapphire varieties are also seen.

Combat: The stargazer uses its carapace as a blind, imitating an
outcropping of precious stone. Wandering animals or greedy ad-
venturers entranced with their find receive a “shocking” surprise.

When the stargazer senses prey (25' range), twin lightning bolts
leap from its eyes, doing 6d6 electrical damage per bolt; the bolts
can fire independently at different targets. It then raises itself
from its shallow hiding space and lunges toward the victim, bit-
ing (4d6) and rending with claws (1d8). It can loose up to six light-
ning bolts, two per round, before stopping to recharge.

If the stargazer is losing a battle, it rolls itself into a ball, stone
shell outward, protecting its soft underside (AC 8). It rolls in a
random direction to escape its tormentor. Roll a 1d12 to deter-
mine the direction the beast escapes in; numbers on the die corres-
pond to positions on a clock face. Those in the indicated direction
must save vs. breath weapon. Those who fail the saving throw
are run over. Victims caught by this rolling action suffer 4d6
crushing damage.

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Stargazers live on the sunny sides of large aste-
roids, basking in the continual sunlight. They are solitary, mating
quickly, hiding their eggs, and abandoning them. Stargazers are
territorial, guarding a range of 1-3 square miles. Two stargazers
may occupy opposite hemispheres of a single asteroid, establish-
ing the opposite sides of the gravity plane as their “territory.”

In mating season stargazers may duel to the death over terri-
tory, mates, and prey. If an area is overpopulated, the stargazer
uses its powerful hind legs to leap from the asteroid. It then rolls
into a ball, to drift through space in hibernation until caught by
the gravity of another asteroid or a shipload of greedy spell-
jammers. The advent of spelljamming humanoids has enlarged
their range.

Ecology:The stargazer is a voracious killer, prone to berserker
rages against large opponents. The monster is its own treasure;
specifically, the carapace is actually an organic form of the crystal
that it most resembles. There is one drawback: Unless treated
with a permanency spell, the carapace crumbles to dust 1d6 days
after the stargazer’s death. Jewelers can cut magically treated star-
gazer shells to produce 1d6 gems of (4d6 +1) X 1000 gp each.
Undead, Stellar

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN;: Wildspace
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Nil
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: 1-10
ARMOR CLASS: 3
MOVEMENT: a

HIT DICE: 5

THACO: 16

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2d4/2d4/3d4
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: S to M (3-7' tall)
MORALE: Steady (12)
XP VALUE: 420

Stellar undead are the corpses of spelljamming sailors returned to
a semblance of life. The corpses are animated by raw energy from
the Negative Material Plane. This energy warps the dying sailor's
brains, twisting their final thoughts of home, safety, and friends
into an unholy desire to walk again among the living, and to be
warm again by drinking their blood.

Due to the vacuum of wildspace, most bodies decompose very
slowly. When viewed from more than 3' away, stellar undead do
not look dead, but much as they did in life. Though their bodies
and clothes show the cause of their deaths, they remove weapons
stuck in their bodies.

Stellar undead retain some vestiges of intelligence, and can
speak one language of those they knew in life. Their voices are a
hollow croak, though some confuse this with a thirsty sailor's dry
throat. Most of their words are monosyllables such as “help,”
“yes,” “no,” “food,” or “thanks.”

In order to track down warm-blooded bodies, the stellar un-
dead have infravision with 90’ range.

Combat: Stellar undead attack by clawing their opponents (2d4
damage per hand) and biting them (3d4 damage). If both claw at-
tacks hit one victim in the same round, the bite attack on the same
victim, if successful, does double damage.

Once a victim has been hit by all three attacks in one round, the
undead changes its tactics. Instead of attacking with its claws, it
holds tight to its new meal, automatically doing 2 hp damage on
each later round. The undead continues biting, doing double
damage if it hits. The victim can break away by making a success-
ful Strength check (allowed once per round).

Like most undead, the stellar undead are immune to all mind-
affecting spells such as sleep, charm, fear, and hold spells. Due to
their close relationship with the Negative Plane, they are turned
as liches. A direct hit with holy water causes 2d12 damage; a
splash does 1d6 damage.

Though the stellar undead still have the clothes and weapons
that they wore in life, they have forgotten how to use them.
Some clumsily try to swing a sword or activate a wand, without
success.

Habitat/Society: Stellar undead have no society or leader. They
tend to congregate around areas where it is normal to find be-
draggled survivors, such as spelljammer wrecks. Sometimes they

 

 

 

 

are found on barren asteroids, where they appear as castaways of
a ship crash.

Their common trick is to cling to fragments of a spelljamming
ship and pretend to be stranded sailors. Some act unconscious,
while others wave frantically and call out to passing ships. When
brought aboard, they try to pass for living sailors as long as possi-
ble, though there is a cumulative 5% chance per turn that the un-
dead lose their self-control and attack in force, sinking their teeth
into the first warm flesh they can grab.

Besides attempting normal “living person combat,” stellar un-
dead sometimes (45%) try non-violent actions from life (eating
food, drinking, writing) to keep up the sham of life before their
hosts. Otherwise, the undead just go where they are led, mum-
bling thanks until they cannot take it any more and tear into their
rescuers.

The chance of stellar undead successfully imitating the living
depends on how long ago the corpses died. At the beginning of
the encounter, roll percentile dice. The result is both how many
days prior to the encounter that the ship crew died, and the
chance that any attempt to “act normal” fails. Thus, a roll of 47
means that the stellar undead died and were “created” 47 days be-
fore being found. Once aboard, one stellar undead tries to act
normal by drinking from a flask; in this example, there is a 47%
chance that the attempt to drink fails.

Ecology: Stellar undead exist only in the Prime Material Plane. If
encountered within five miles of an actual gate to the Negative
Material Plane, the stellar undead cannot be turned, and they re-
generate 2 hp per round.

The stellar undead can sense the presence of other types of un-
dead in their line of sight.

 

 

 
Witchlight Marauders

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Primary Secondary Tertiary Space Remote
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any Any Any Any Wildspace
FREQUENCY: —_——_—_——— Very rare ———___—_—_—__
ORGANIZATION: Solitary Horde Swarm Solitary Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Diurnal Nocturnal Any Any Any
DIET: ———_——_— Omnivore ———_____-
INTELLIGENCE: Low Low Semi- Average Non-
TREASURE: ——_———— None ——_——_
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil Chaotic evil Neutral evil Chaotic neutral Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1-3 2-20" 1d4* 1 1-5
ARMOR CLASS: =§ 0 2 mS 5
MOVEMENT: 9 48 16 SR 3 24
HIT DICE: 15 8 4 45 7
THACO: 5 13 17 5 13
NO. OF ATTACKS: 7 6, spit 3 7, sunbeam 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 3d6(x6)/5d12 2d6(x6)/3d6/2d10 1d6 +3(x2)/1d10 1d6 hull pts(x6)/ See below
2d6 hull pts/25d10
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below ———____—_-
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil
SIZE: G (200') H (20') M (5'-6') G (1000') G (25')
MORALE: Fearless Elite Steady Fearless Steady
(19-20) (13-14) (11-12) (19-20) (11-12)
XP VALUE: 12,000 6,000 270 40,000 2,000

* indicates per number of previous monster; i.e., one primary can hatch 2d10 secondaries; two secondaries can hatch 2-8 tertiaries
(1d4 each).

    
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
    
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
 
  
 
  
 

 

Orc shamans created the witchlight marauders during the escala-
tion of the Unhuman Wars to “counter ruthless elf aggression,” as
one surviving orc scroll reads. In truth, the marauders were shock
troops, organic first-strike weapons meant to devastate whole el-
ven planets. Their efficiency as killing machines was matched
only by their fast breeding.

Luckily for the rest of humanoid civilization, these monsters
were wiped out during the Unhuman Wars. There are orcish leg-
ends, however, of timestop devices that preserved some of these
beasts as doomsday weapons.

Combat: The slug-like land marauders were enormous (500+
feet), dwarfing even venerable red dragons. Everything in the
witchlight marauder’s path—plants, animals, city walls,
mountains—was food for the beast’s cavernous central maw. Sec- ¢ Ms Dy.
ondary mouths sprouted to gobble up prey on either side of the pS /
beast’s path. Land marauders especially liked metal, mineral de- Bs
posits, and magical items. All food made its way to the blast @
furnace gut, producing poison gas—and more witchlight] j
marauders.

As the marauder gorged itself, it periodically ejected secondary
marauders. These smaller (20’ tall) killers leapt forth, rending and ‘
killing with six poisonous metallic talons (2d6 each; save vs. poi-
son or take 1d10 additional damage), steel teeth (3d6), and a
sweeping spiked tail (2d10). The secondaries also spat an acid jet
(1d8 per round, 30’ range), and could climb nearly any surface
with their gripping feet. These monsters ranged the countryside,
covering miles in a single night, homing in on the scent of elven
blood, destroying all survivors of the primaries’ attack. :

Once the secondaries gorged themselves on living flesh, they (>
ejected still smaller fighters. These small (4' tall) tertiaries were
berserker warriors with two metallic sword blades in place of
hands. Their strength (18/50, +3 damage) and agility made them
fearsome in combat.

After a week's “foraging,” the primary marauder burrowed
deep underground and established a lair. In the two weeks that

 

followed, guarded by secondaries, the primary split like an am-
oeba into two primary marauders. The cycle continued until the
marauders ran out of food, whereupon they turned on and de-
stroyed each other.

These land marauders reached their targets via still larger crea-
tures: the space marauders. These enormous (1000’) reptilian hor-
Witchlight Marauders

 

rors traveled through wildspace on sails spun from special organs
on their bodies. These sails doubled as focusing mirrors, enabling
the space beast to focus a deadly (25d10) sunbeam on targets.
Once they reached a crystal sphere, they phased their way in,
searching for small celestial bodies to feed on. Like their smaller
kin, flying marauders ate any being, rock, or small moon they
found, creating both land marauders and explosive projectiles
(12d6 hull points of damage).

The spacegoing marauders were enormous (1,000’). A croco-
dilian head sported a nest of thousands of yard-long, razor- sharp
teeth. This head was encrusted with glowing red eyes, and bit for
2-12 hull points of damage. Surrounding the central head were six
long, flexible necks ending in eyeless heads with gaping, ship-
smashing maws (1-6 hull pts damage per head). The scaly, veined
necks were attached to a tree-trunk shaped body that terminated
in a pulsating mass of writhing hawser-like tentacles. At the cen-
ter of this squirming mass were the umbilicals to which were at-
tached three primary marauders. As individual primaries reached
maturity and detached, new ones grew in their places.

The space marauder’s crocodilian mouth held thousands of
yard-long, razor-sharp teeth (2d6 hull points). Surrounding the
many-eyed central head were six long, flexible necks ending in
eyeless heads with gaping mouths (1d6 hull points per head). The
scaly necks attached to a tree trunk-shaped body that terminated
in a mass of writhing hawser-like tentacles. At the center of this
squirming mass, umbilicals held three primary marauders. As in-
dividual primaries reached maturity and detached, new ones
grew in their places.

In addition to the land marauders, the spacers could also birth
1d4 +1 remote feeders. These were little more than gigantic (550'
diameter) flying gullets that would engulf matter from planets, di-
gest it, and return to the mother beast to provide it with addi-
tional nourishment.

Habitat/Society: These solitary war beasts were bred and un-
leashed by orcish mages for use in the Unhuman Wars. The orcs’
overall objective was a scorched-earth strategy that would leave
the elven worlds lifeless, barren rocks.

Fortunately, the elven forces found out about the plan before
the witchlight marauders were unleashed. Using their own new
weapons (see the “Bionoid” and “Spirit Warrior” entries), they at-
tacked and destroyed the orcs.

Some old scrolls hint that one of the space marauders escaped
the elves’ onslaught, burning its way through the elven blockade
into space. Elven sages refuse to comment on this, dismissing the
writings as orcish propaganda.

Ecology: During the Unhuman Wars, orcish breeders developed
creatures that were meant to counter the threat of elven spirit
warriors. These monsters served as land and air/space attackers.
It was thought that the elves eradicated all of these doomsday
weapons, but apparently a few may have survived either by en-
capsulation in time-stop fields or by wandering the starlanes. If
an adventuring party were to find one of these organic time-
bombs, it would behoove them to leave the area immediately.

 

 

 

 

 
Xixchil

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any

FREQUENCY: Uncommon

ORGANIZATION: Solitary/tribal

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Diurnal

DIET: Carnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Average-Genius (8-18)

TREASURE: Ww

ALIGNMENT: Any

NO. APPEARING: 1-3

ARMOR CLASS: See below

MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 1+1

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1(3)

DAMAGE/ATTACK: by weapon type, or 2d6/2d6 or
1d4 + poison

SPECIAL ATTACKS: poison bite

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (5‘base)

MORALE: Very steady (13-14)

XP VALUE: Varies

Xixchil (ZIX-chil) are praying mantis-like “mantoids” who are ac-
complished craftsmen. Using the fine scalpel-like manipulators at
the ends of their forelimbs, they create fine metalwork, clothing,
and clockwork devices whose complexity and beauty rival even
that of the reigar.

The xixchil’s main avocation (some say religion) is surgery. The
xixchil believe that the body is like a house, and that one must
add to the blank shell to make it truly one’s home. Because of this
belief, xixchil are very easy to tell apart—their exoskeletons can
be covered with inlays, gem settings and other adornments, and
they may be grown into fantastic shapes. Most xixchil who deal
with humans are named after their “modifications” —Spike,
Crest, Hook, and Spinner, for example. The xixchil talent for sur-
gical adornment has found many applications among non-xixchil
as well.

Xixchil can synthesize a person-specific anesthetic that renders
a patient unconscious for the duration of the “operation.” This en-
zyme soup requires a taste of the subject's (or victim's) clothing,
weaponry, or any object that the subject has held in close body
contact. A single bite (normal attack roll) administers the dose, or
the saliva can work through food or drink.

In this manner the xixchil also create poisons. Once the xixchil
has touched the victim, it licks its finger blade to taste the victim's
essence and synthesize poison. On the next round, the xixchil
bites to administer the poison saliva. Generally, the poison reacts
with the victim's body chemistry, paralyzing or killing the victim
in one round. Those bitten save vs. poison at —4 due to the tai-
lored brew. The xixchil may also spit the poison onto its finger
blades. The saliva must be used within ten turns before it breaks
down and becomes useless.

The xixchil communicate among themselves with a complex
language of both gestures and spoken words punctuated with
sharp clicks of their mandibles. The xixchil mandibles are so com-
plex that they can be used to form the words of humanoid speech.

Combat: Most xixchil prefer to strike from surprise or a position
of advantage. “Stealth equals efficiency,’ says one xixchil prov-
erb.

Xixchil tactics rely on their forelimbs, which have sharp re-
tractable blades. The xixchil slaps with its blades extended for 2d6
damage per forelimb. It can strike twice per round in this fashion,

 

 

 

 

using a sort of boxing maneuver, feinting and dodging to defend
itself. Unadorned xixchil have a base AC 5 due to their exoskele-
tons.

Battle-hardened xixchil: When a xixchil pursues a life of com-
bat, it purchases body modifications—special limbs in the form
of maces, blowguns, swords, man-catchers, or other weapons.
Use the Player's Handbook for weapon-limb damage statistics,
since these modifications are comparable to the actual items.

Large xixchil carry so many battle “adornments” that they be-
come killing machines, hiring themselves out for contract work as
mercenaries, bodyguards, gladiators, or leg-breakers. These
battle-hardened xixchil may have as many as six attacks per
round, due to their specialized extra limbs, increased speed, or
enhanced strength. Their Armor Class can reach ~4.

Battle-hardened xixchil are rare, since fighting is not the race's
main concern. But in the words of one xixchil proverb: “Scalpels
are knives.” The xixchil’s flair for sharp objects and their inborn
ability to synthesize poison win them renown as assassins.

Habitat/Society: Xixchil evolved on a liveworld among many
predators. Their modification ability enabled them to grow de-
fensive weapons and camouflage. Aided by their unique metabo-
lism, they poisoned and slashed their way to the top of the food
chain.

Since danger was ever-present in xixchil life, females spun egg
cases containing 10d10 eggs. When they hatched, the young im-
mediately dueled and ate each other until one or two individuals
remained. After the first week of life, the infants’ homicidal ten-
dencies faded, allowing the xixchil to achieve civilization.

This inborn winnowing process still occurs today. “Survival of
the fittest” remains a major tenet of xixchil society, which stresses
individual achievement and improvement over group effort. A
‘a allegiance is first to self, then to family; society comes

ast.

Since they discovered spelljamming, xixchil have realized that
there is an endless variety of places and beings and things, all use-
Xixchil

ful for attaining greater prestige. Ironically, this desire to experi-
ence the new has caused some individuals to realize that there is
more to life than merely self-preservation. This motivates them to
try many things—even join adventuring parties.

Xixchil and Adventurers

In this capacity, the xixchil is renowned for its surgical ability. In-
jured adventurers, or those who simply desire enhancements, can
count on swift, sure treatment for their problems. With their
sharp forearms and fingertips, the xixchil can execute the finest
surgical techniques, separating nerve endings, even isolating sin-
gle veins for modification. When coupled with clerical magic, a
xixchil adventurer can make a party nearly unbeatable.

Their unique digestive processes also work on the cellular level,
allowing them to create chemicals with many effects—body ar-
mor, increased strength, specialized appendages, etc. These
“adornments” have earned these surgeons a mixed reputation
among their clients, for humanoid aesthetics mean nothing to the
xixchil. They believe that form follows function, which has led to
some really unhappy customers—for instance, the dwarf who
wanted superhuman strength, so the xixchil surgeon modified
him to use it. Who needs a head, the surgeon reasoned, except for
use as a muscle anchor? The poor headless dwarf, though very
strong, never again won a beauty contest.

Suffice to say there are more than enough “beautiful people”
who are no longer that way thanks to the gentle ministrations of
the xixchil. But oh, are they functional!

As a general rule of thumb, if PCs request special modifica-
tion from a xixchil—for instance, “] want wings”—the modifi-
cation is non-magical, irreversible, and functional. If the PC
can no longer craw! dungeons because his wings are too big, too
bad. That PC probably also gets a larger lung capacity, an en-
hanced appetite, and hollow bones—all essential to flyers.
Overall, any given modification takes from one day to two
weeks . . . longer if the client requests extensive changes like
super-strength or body armor.

The “adornments” don’t come cheap. Accomplished surgeons
charge 2d10 X 100 gp per change, varying the price with the ex-
tent and complexity of each operation. Implanted dagger sheaths
and hidden dart throwers are fairly simple jobs. A full-body
makeover with gender change is not. However, if one is rich and
on the run, it could prove a valuable investment.

As an aside, this penchant for adornment also extends to lower
animal and plant life. Blooming birds and winged kittens are
common sale items. Xixchil spelljamming ships are prime exam-
ples of plant sculpture, sporting orchid-like blooms as gangways,
exotic naturally-grown staterooms, and sail-like leaves. The in-
troduction of these non-intelligent spacegoing beauties has
caused consternation among the elves, since they rival the elven
ships in quality but are easier to maintain.

 

 

 

 

 
& CLIMATE/TERRAIN:

 

Yitsan

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Any
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Pack
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1-4
ARMOR CLASS: 0
MOVEMENT: 12, Fl3 (D), Br 6, Sw 12
HIT DICE: 11
THACO: 10
NO. OF ATTACKS: 6
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d6/1d6/3d6/2d12
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: +1 weapon or better to hit
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil
SIZE: L (10’ tall)
MORALE: Fanatic (18)
XP VALUE: 7,000

The yitsan is also known as “treasure bane” and “intruder within.”
Unwary sailors bring the eggs aboard ship in newfound treasure
hoards.

Yitsan measure around 10’ in height. They are humanoid, with
8' tails. Their skin is a fine mesh of grey-green scales. Yitsan have
long claws on their four-fingered hands and toes, and their
mouths have three sets of sharp teeth. Perhaps their most unusual
characteristic is their lack of eyes. An odor of salt hangs about
them.

If the yitsan have a language, it has yet to be discovered. They
frequently utter hisses, shrieks, roars, and growls.

Combat: Fighting is what the yitsan does best. Its four sets of long
claws each cause 1d6 damage. The yitsan can use the claws on its
two feet just as easy as the claws on its hands. The only ways it
can use all four claws at once is atop a victim, or while trampling
underfoot.

The yitsan begins melee using its tail, with its many razor-sharp
projections (2d12 damage). The tail can strike up to three oppo-
nents in a closely-spaced line. Only one attack roll is made, re-
gardless of the number of opponents (use the best AC among the
victims). Victims of the tail sweep must make a Dexterity check
or fall. The yitsan tries to trample a prone victim with all four sets
of claws (4d6 damage).

The tail can also wrap around a human-sized victim. Once it
hits (for no damage), starting on the following round the tail con-
stricts for 2d4 damage per round, plus 1d6 cutting damage from
the tail’s razor edges (not vs. victims in metal armor). A victim
must succeed in a Strength ability check (trying once per round)
to escape the tail. The yitsan can attack other victims with its
claws while constricting with its tail.

The yitsan has three rows of sharp teeth that cause 3d6 dam-
age. Once its jaws get hold of someone, they continue to grind,
inflicting an automatic 2d6 points of damage per round. A victim
gets Strength ability checks to escape as described above.

Due to their blindness, yitsan are immune to illusions and any
spell that requires the target to see. However, a yitsan’s senses of
hearing, taste, and smell are inhumanly acute. They locate oppo-
nents in a 50' radius by their breathing or their scent (80%
chance). Like snakes, the yitsan use their tongues to taste the air.
Casting a silence spell on a yitsan gives it only a 25% chance of
detecting an opponent, and a —2 penalty to its attack rolls.

 

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Yitsan have no organization. Each beast is out
for itself. Most encounters with yitsan are with young, since
adults avoid large groups of humans in favor of less intelligent
prey.

A yitsan reproduces by laying a group of 1d4 eggs. These eggs
are 1"-wide golden disks. To the casual observer, a yitsan egg
looks like a gold piece, except that it is featureless.

When the egg hatches, the newborn yitsan resembles a tiny (1" )
green lizard. It crawls into a cozy crack in a ship's bulkhead and
eats bugs, mice, wood, and cloth. The lizard grows to 6" in two
weeks, trusting to its chameleon-like hide to remain unnoticed.
Sailors may notice small nibble marks in their clothing or wood
implements; there is a 1% chance per sailor to notice this per day.

After the lizard reaches a foot in length, it undergoes rapid and
painful metabolic changes, maturing in two hours. This frantic
growth spurt drains much energy and leaves the adult yitsan rav-
enously hungry. The yitsan always seeks a private place to ma-
ture, for it is helpless during the transformation.

An adult yitsan lays eggs once it has eaten its first meal. Once
again it seeks a stash of coins, perhaps even returning to its
spawning hoard.

Ecology: The yitsan is a predator of unknown origin. Some elven
scholars guess that the yitsan is an orcish biological weapon left
over from the Unhuman Wars that somehow escaped into civi-
lized space.
Zurchin

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Wildspace, asteroid fields
FREQUENCY: Common
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Non- (0)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1-3

ARMOR CLASS: 4
MOVEMENT: 8

HIT DICE: 1+1

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4+2
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Poison
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Spines
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: T (6" to 1’ diameter)
MORALE: Unsteady (5-7)
XP VALUE: 120

The zurchin, commonly called “star urchin” or “space porcupine,”
is a spherical mollusk with myriad radial spines. It moves slowly,
using a muscular belly-foot for propulsion, The zurchin scav-
enges organic matter, dust, and wood.

Individuals appear in many bright colors, yellow and red, pur-
ple and blue. Striped varieties are not uncommon. They range in
size from 6" to a foot in diameter.

Combat: The zurchin normally attacks only when disturbed. It
shoots poisonous hollow spines, using gas pressure so great that
the range of the spines matches an arrow’s. The zurchin can fire
1d4 spines per round, pegging a man-sized target with deadly ac-
curacy. These spines are the equivalent of +2 darts, doing 1d4 +2
points of damage. A zurchin typically has hundreds of spines.

Their poison is released on impact, expelled by a small sac in-
side the spine. The poison paralyzes the victim's heart and breath-
ing; the victim must save vs. poison or die in 2d6 hours. A
successful save negates subsequent poison damage; after a slight
fever and nausea, the target develops immunity to the zurchin’s
poison.

Habitat/Society: Zurchins inhabit the rocks of asteroid reefs, eat-
ing bits of cast-off food that fall into the gravity planes. They fre-
quently lair among colonies of mortiss (see the first
SPELLJAMMER™ Monstrous Compendium).

Ecology: Zurchins are peaceful scavengers. A zurchin’s spines
conceal a complex 40-part mouth that can extrude hard, sharp
teeth. Given hours or days, these teeth can excavate holes in
wood, rock, and even iron. The zurchin uses the holes as hiding
places or mating areas.

Ten to 20 of a female zurchin’s darts each contain thousands of
microscopic eggs. If an egg is implanted in a victim (5% chance),
the victim suffers no poison or ill effects (except impact damage).

 

 

 

 

 

 

Over the next week, the egg-bearer loses its appetite, becomes
confused, and begins to itch uncontrollably. At the end of a week
the victim is paralyzed and dies of suffocation. Then each egg
hatches a tiny new zurchin, which feeds on its dead host and its
fellow hatchlings. A cure disease spell destroys the incubating
eggs.

The egg-laden dart can also lodge in a wooden or organic spell-
jammer hull. Incubation time doubles to two weeks. A spell-
jammer may be far away from the original asteroid reef when the
crew discovers a sudden, major zurchin infestation. Even worse,
they may not discover it until too late. More than one dragonfly
ship has surprised its small crew by collapsing suddenly, leaving
nothing intact but the helm and a few hundred zurchins.

To wealthy and decadent neogi, the zurchin is a particularly
prized delicacy. Specialist chefs prepare the zurchin meat (ordi-
narily a deadly poison to the neogi) in a secret way that neutral-
izes the poison—usually. The resulting dish attracts rich neogi
diners less for its exotic taste than for its danger; occasionally a
diner fails to survive the evening.

The neogi specialist chefs, called “white sashes” for their char-
acteristic garb, belong to a caste of familial dynasties engaged in
cutthroat competition to gain one another's trade secrets. All
white-sash neogi pay handsomely for zurchin meat, so penurious
spelljammers risk their lives to harvest the unassuming scaven-
gers.

Besides neogi, predators such as firebirds (q.v.) consider zur-
chin meat tasty.

 

 
 

Prepare to be boarded! Here are still
more new, inventive, dangerous, and
entertaining creatures and races for
your SPELLIAMMER™ campaign setting!
aS rel eod lp avi are (ole B eels
gypsies, space plants, and much, much
more awaiting your stellar travelers in
7 these pages. Elven war-beasts, giant
Y/ : space turtles, orcish death-creatures,
and other beings of the phlogiston, crystal spheres, and wildspace
roam this volume. Some look nasty, and are; some look nasty, and
aren't. Which are which? Read the entries and find out for
yourself! And of course, they are organized into five-hole-punched
pages that fit right into your Monstrous Compendium binders.

TSR, Inc. DB acon
POB 756 120 Church End, Cherry Hinton
a | Cambridge CB1 3LB

WI 53147 U.S.A. TSR, Inc. United Kingdom

©1991 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Printed in U.S.A.
ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS is a registered trademark owned by TSR, Inc.
SPELLI|AMMER and the TSR logo are trademarks owned by TSR, Inc.
0 ""463635"021199™ 1

$10.95 ULS.
xe IAS

%
= a

ISBN 1-56076-07 1-0
Z2119XXX1401

 
