2145

 

    

ae Roy

Dungeons{))ragons

 

MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM®
Annual

 

    

Volume One
 

MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM”
Annual

Volume One

 

ADVANCED DUNGEONS & Dracons, AD&D, DUNGEON Mastir, AL-QADIM, FORGOTTEN REALMS, MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM, and RAVENLOFT are registered trademarks
owned by TSR, Inc. DM, MonsTrous MANUAL, PLANESCAre, and the TSR logo are trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. All TSR characters, character names, and the distinc-
tive likenesses thereof are trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. © 1994 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Printed in the U.S.A

Random House and its affiliate companies have worldwide distribution rights in the book trade for English-language products of TSR, Inc. Distributed to the toy and
hobby trade by regional distributors. Distributed to the book and hobby trade in the United Kingdom by TSK Ltd. This material is protected under the copyright laws
of the United States of America. Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the material contained herein is prohibited without the express written consent of TSK, Inc

TSR Ltd

120 Church End
Cherry Hinton
Cambridge CB1 3L6
United Kingdom

TSR, Inc
POR 756
Lake Geneva
WI 53147
USA

2145 ISBN 1-56076-838-X

 
Editor: David Wise
Project Coordinator: Roger Moore
Cover Artist: Jeff Easley
Interior Artist: Tony DiTerlizzi
Art Coordinator: Peggy Cooper
Electronic Pre-press Coordinator: Tim Coumbe
Typography: Nancy J. Kerkstra
Graphic Artist: Dawn Murin

 
 

 

How to Use This Book

 

 

This book is the first annual MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM” appen-
dix in a series featuring creatures that appeared in various TSR
role-playing games and periodicals over a single year—in this
case, 1993. The selections come from myriad game worlds, but
they've been developed with the intent to make them useful in
any campaign setting; those who own products containing
these monsters may discover slight variations if they compare
the respective entries. Even so, monsters that come from prod-
uct lines like the AL-QADIM® campaign setting or the
RAVENLOFT® setting’s realm of terror often remain quite dis-
tinctive, and they should be chosen with care for use in an
adventure. For example, most adventurers aren’t likely to hap-
pen upon a tasked genie or a psionic lich as they wander along
the road to glory. Therefore, there are no standard “random
encounter” tables included in this text. Instead, some advice
on how to generate adventure-specific random encounters has
been added. See page 6, “Beyond Random Encounters.”
Each monster entry includes the following information:

CLIMATE/TERRAIN defines where the creature is most often
found. Normally, climates include terms such as arctic, subarc-
tic, temperate, and tropical. Terrain types include plain/scrub,
forest, rough/hill, mountain, swamp, and desert.

FREQUENCY is the likelihood of encountering a creature in
any given area. Very rare indicates a 4% chance, rare is 11%,
uncommon is 20%, and common is a 65% chance. Chances can
be adjusted for special areas. This entry can be used as a
guideline for adventure design.

ORGANIZATION is a description of the general social struc-
ture that the monster adopts. Common types are solitary, clan,
pack, herd, and flock. In many cases, solitary includes small
family groups or mated pairs.

ACTIVITY CYCLE is the time of day when the monster is
normally awake and most alert. Those who tend to be busiest
at night may be active at any time in subterranean or similar
settings. It is worth remembering that the activity cycle entry
is a general guide, and exceptions are fairly common.

DIET indicates what the creature generally eats, of course.
Carnivores eat meat, herbivores eat plants, omnivores eat
either, and scavengers dine mainly on carrion. Unusual
entries, like life energy or emotions, may appear from time to
time, and they are fully explained in the text.

INTELLIGENCE is the equivalent of the attribute score of the
same name. Certain unintelligent monsters are instinctively
cunning hunters, and these are noted in the monster descrip-
tions. Ratings correspond roughly to the following Intelli-
gence ability scores:

0 Non-intelligent or not ratable
1 Animal intelligence
244 Semi-intelligent
>! Low intelligence
8-10 Average (human) intelligence

11-12 Very intelligent
13-14 Highly intelligent
15-16 Exceptionally intelligent
17-18 Genius
19-20 Supra-genius
21+ Godlike intelligence

TREASURE refers to the treasure tables that are found in the
DuNnGEON Master® Guide (DMG). The entry indicates the type
of treasure likely to be found on or with an individual mon-
ster. Treasure should be adjusted downward if only a few
monsters are encountered. This figure may be further
increased or decreased at the DM's discretion. These tables
should not be used to place dungeon treasure, as numbers
encountered underground will be much smaller. Intelligent
monsters will usually use magical items that are present, and
try to carry off their most valuable treasures if hard-pressed.

Major treasures are normally found in the monster's lair
and designated in parentheses. As a rule, these should not be
determined randomly, but ought to be designed and placed by
the DM. If he or she decides to assign such treasure randomly,
it’s best to roll for each type possible; if all rolls fail, no treasure
of any type is found.

Unusually large or small treasures are noted by a paren-
thetical multiplier (x10, x’, etc.). These should not be confused
with treasure type X.

ALIGNMENT indicates the general behavior of an average
monster of that type. Exceptions, though uncommon, may cer-
tainly be encountered.

NO. APPEARING indicates an average number of creatures
that will be encountered in the wild. The DM should alter this
to fit particular circumstances as the need arises. In many
cases, additional information on this topic will be presented in
the Habitat/Society or Ecology section.

ARMOR CLASS is a rating of the monster's resistance to
damage in combat. In many cases this is based upon the crea-
ture’s natural defenses, but it can also indicate armor worn by
humanoids or other creatures. In some cases, high speed, nat-
ural agility, or magical protection may play a part in the deter-
mination of a creature’s Armor Class rating. Humans and
humanoids of roughly man size that wear armor will have an
unarmored rating in parentheses. Listed ACs do not include any
special bonuses noted in the monster's description.

MOVEMENT shows the relative speed of the creature com-
pared to an unencumbered human, who has a rating of 12.
Higher speeds may be possible for short periods. Human,
demihuman, and humanoid movement rates are often modi-
fied by armor type (unarmored rates are given in parenthe-
ses). Movement through common media are abbreviated as
follows:

Fl Flying
Sw Swimming
Br Burrowing
Wb Moving in a web

Flying creatures also have a maneuverability class of A to E,
which is indicated in parentheses. Complete information on
maneuverability classes and their use can be found in the aer-
ial combat rules in the DMG.

HIT DICE indicates the number of dice rolled to generate the
creature's hit points. Unless otherwise stated, Hit Dice are 8-
sided. The Hit Dice are rolled and the numbers shown are
added to determine the monster’s hit points.

Some monsters will have additional points added to the
total rolled on the Hit Dice. Thus, a creature with a rating of
How to Use This Book

 

 

4+4 has between 8 and 36 hit points. Monsters with a bonus of
+3 or more added to their rolled hit points are considered to
have an extra Hit Die for the purposes of attack rolls and sav-
ing throws. Thus, a creature with 4 + 4 HD attacks and saves
as if it had 5 Hit Dice.

In rare cases, a monster will have a hit point spread with-
out a Hit Dice rating. In order to determine the number of Hit
Dice that such creatures have for attacks and saving throws,
divide the listed hit points by 4. Round the Hit Die rating up
with remainders of 0.5 or greater, and drop all other fractions.

THAC0 is the base roll that the monster needs to hit an enemy
with an Armor Class of 0. This is a function of Hit Dice, as
described in the Combat section of the DMG. Modifiers to the
creature's attack roll will be presented in the Combat section
of the entry, but the listed THACO does not include any special
bonuses.

NO. OF ATTACKS indicates the number of times that the
monster can attack in a single round. Multiple attacks can
indicate several attacking arms, raking paws, multiple heads,
etc. In some cases this does not include special attacks listed in
the Combat section, but the text will make that clear. This
number may be modified by hits that sever members, by haste
and slow spells, and so forth.

DAMAGE/ATTACK shows the severity of a given attack and
is expressed as a number and type of dice, which are rolled to
determine the total number of hit points lost by the target of
the attack. If the monster uses weapons, the damage listed is
for its favored weapon. Damage bonuses due to high strength,
special abilities, and the like are listed in the Combat section
of the entry.

SPECIAL ATTACKS details any unusual attack modes pos-
sessed by the creature such as breath weapons, spell use, poi-
son, and the like. These are fully explained in the monster
description.

SPECIAL DEFENSES provides information detailing any
unusual resistances to harm that the monster might have.
These commonly include an immunity to certain forms of
attack or an invulnerability to nonmagical weapons, among
other possibilities. These are fully detailed in the monster
description.

MAGIC RESISTANCE is the percentage chance that magic
cast upon the creature will fail to affect it, even if other crea-
tures nearby are affected. If the spell penetrates this resistance,
the creature is still entitled to any saving throws normally
allowed.

SIZE is an indication of the overall dimensions of the creature.
In the case of humanoids, it indicates the height of the mon-
ster. For other creatures (snakes and dragons, for example), it
refers to the monster's length. Other measurements are possi-
ble and will be explained in the text.

T= tiny under 2 feet tall
S =small 2 to 4 feet tall
M = man-sized 4 to 7 feet tall

= large 7 to 12 feet tall
H = huge 12 to 25 feet tall

G = gargantuan over 25 feet tall

MORALE is a general rating of how likely the monster is to
persevere in the face of adversity or armed opposition. This
guideline may be adjusted for individual circumstances.
Morale ratings correspond to the following range:

2-4 Unreliable
5-7 Unsteady
8-10 Average
11-12 Steady
13-14 Elite
15-16 Champion
17-18 Fanatic
19-20 Fearless

XP VALUE is the number of experience points awarded for
defeating (not necessarily killing) the monster. This value is a
guideline that may be modified by the DM for the degree of
challenge, encounter situation, and overall campaign balance.

PSIONICS gives a complete breakdown of the creature's
innate psionic abilities, including sciences or devotions known
and PSPs available. A thorough understanding of this section
requires familiarity with the Complete Psionics Handbook. This
entry is included only for those creatures that have psionic
powers.

Combat provides all of the information that a DM will need to
resolve a battle with the monster. Among other things, it
details special combat abilities, arms or armor, and unusual
tactics employed by the creature.

Habitat/Society outlines the monster’s general behavior,
nature, social structure, and goals. Whereas the previous sec-
tion provided information needed for resolving skirmishes
involving the creature, this entry provides information useful
for role-playing encounters.

Ecology describes how the monster fits into the campaign
world, gives useful products or byproducts of the creature,
and presents other miscellaneous information. This informa-
tion can help the Dungeon Master decide exactly when and
where to introduce the monster into his or her campaign.

Close Variations of a monster are given in a special section
after the main monster entry. For example, the (dog,) suluqi
entry also includes a brief discussion of the jungle hound, a
closely related creature.

 
 

= eee

Calculating Experience Points

 

 

One of the things that game designers love to do is change
things. As of this writing, it has been about five years since the
final touches were put into ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS”
2nd Edition rules. In that time, a number of major and minor
changes have been introduced to the game system. One of the
more important revisions is a change to the formula used to
calculate experience-point rewards for defeating the various
monsters encountered during an adventure. This revision was
introduced in the Monstrous Manual hardbound and has
become the new standard for the calculation of experience
points.

The experience point values for the monsters in this
MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM appendix have all been calculated
using the new, revised rules. The table to the right, updating
the one printed in the AD&D* 2nd Edition DUNGEON MASTER
Guide, is provided in order to make the DM's task easier when
designing his or her own monsters.

It’s worth noting that there are cases where DMs will want
to deviate from the values given here. Some monsters are so
powerful that the experience point rewards generated with
these tables will be far less than a party might deserve. A good
example of such a creature is one of the denizens of the Abyss,
described in the PLANESCAPE” campaign setting, or any of the
various darklords of the RAVENLOFT campaign setting.

What has changed?

None of these changes affects the general way in which experi-
ence points are calculated. A DM still begins by noting the
number of Hit Dice that a monster has (Table 31) and then
applying some modifiers, based on the general powers and
abilities of that creature. Only the modifiers (Table 32) have
changed, although both tables have been printed here for easy
reference.

Two new entries for psionic abilities have been added to
the table. Thus, the possibility that a monster might have
psionic disciplines (see The Complete Psionics Handbook) avail-
able to it has now been taken into account. Dungeon Masters
who are not using psionic powers in their campaigns can sim-
ply ignore these additions.

Both the magic resistance and breath weapon entries have
been split into two categories, reflecting the great range of pos-
sibilities within these classifications.

The bonus normally awarded for flight has been expanded
to include other special forms of movement. Thus, a monster
like a bullette or xorn, which can travel through the earth at
great speed, would receive the same adjustment to its experi-
ence point value as a flying creature.

Of course, exceptions and unusual cases will still crop up.
When this happens, Dungeon Masters will simply have to use
a little common sense in the awarding of experience points.

Table 31: Creature Experience Point Values

HD or Level XP Value
Less than 1-1 7
1-1 tol 15
1+1 to2 35
2+1to3 65
3+1 to4 120
4+1to5 175
5+1 to 6 270
6+1 to7 420
7+1to8 650
8+1 to9 975
9+1 to 10+ 1,400
11 to 12+ 2,000

13 or higher

Table 32:

+1
+1
+]
+1
+]
+]
+1
+1
+1
+]
+]
+1
+1
+1
+1
+]
+1
+1
+]
+1

+2
+2
+2
+2
+2
+2
+2
+2
+2
+2
+2

+3
+3

2,000 + 1,000 per
additional Hit Die

Hit Dice Value Modifiers

Armor Class 0 or lower

Blood drain

Breath weapon (under 20 hp maximum damage)
Cause disease

Employs psionic devotions

Flies or has other special movement power
Greater than normal hit points (over 6 hp/ HD)
Has and uses magical items or weapons

High (13-14) or better Intelligence

Hit only by magical or silver weapons

Immune to a spell or spells

Immunity to or half-damage from any weapon type
Invisible at will

Magic resistance (less than 50%)

Missile weapons or ranged attack ability
Multiple (four or more) attacks per round
Regeneration

Spellcasting (level 2 or less)

Unlisted special defense mode

Unlisted nonmagical special attack mode

Breath weapon (over 20 hp maximum damage)
Causes weakness or fear

Employs psionic sciences

Magic resistance (50% or better)

Multiple attacks inflicting over 30 points of damage
Paralysis

Poison

Single attack inflicting over 20 points of damage
Spellcasting (level 3 or greater)

Swallows whole

Unlisted special magical attack mode

Energy drain (level or ability draining)
Petrification
Beyond Random Encounters

 

 

As most Dungeon Masters know, random encounters have
long been a part of the AD&D game system. Briefly defined,
they are confrontations that aren’t directly linked to the plot of
the adventure. They can fill the holes between key events, get
the player characters (PCs) moving when they linger too long
in one place, remind the PCs that dangers may assault them
anywhere, provide a little action in an adventure where prob-
lem solving is the focus, or simply occur because the dice dic-
tate it. But generic random encounters, taken directly from a
table in a MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM appendix, can sometimes
be inappropriate. Even when the terrain and climate of a pre-
generated encounter table matches that in which the PCs cur-
rently travel, some or all of the monsters on the list may still be
unsuitable to the individual campaign, requiring the DM to
reroll for a different creature or just pick one from the catalog.
In a tome such as this one, which contains a spread of mon-
sters originating in several distinct campaign settings, the dice
can dictate some particularly odd encounters.

Chapter 11 of the DUNGEON MasTER Guide provides com-
plete instructions for creating encounter tables. With just a few
minutes of preparation, the DM can generate random
encounter tables that are perfectly suited to the campaign at
hand, consisting only of monsters that would reasonably
appear and that would provide a well-balanced challenge for
the adventuring party. With just a little more groundwork,
however, the DM can create a random encounter table that
enhances role-playing and contributes directly to the
adventure outline. These are encounters that aren’t necessary
to complete the quest at hand, but which sprinkle a few more
clues along the trail. They may also serve to put the party back
on track, should they wander from the path that the DM
intends them to follow. As with common random encounter
tables, a chart determines which meeting occurs with a given
die throw, and the DM periodically rolls the dice to see if one
occurs, When each possible event is a logical part of the sce-
nario, the game is enhanced as a whole.

Random encounters that enhance role-playing are fun too.
They’re as rewarding to the DM as they are to the players. To
illustrate the concept, consider the following scenario: A vam-
pire has been stalking the land and the party is trying to track
it down. Before the players gather for the adventure, the DM
sets up six random encounters and arbitrarily assigns a rea-
sonable percentage chance (say, 35%), once or twice per day,
that one of them will take place. A simplified encounter table
might look something like this:

Die Roll Encounter

1 Party finds a blood-drained body with clues to
the location of the vampire’s lair on it.

2 Party finds a diary that tells the story of the vam-
pire’s origin and hints at some of its habits.

3 Minions of the vampire attack the party while
they rest.

4 A wandering mystic is found along the trail. She

consults the stars and provides the PCs with
information about the vampire’s weaknesses.

5 Party comes across a local who remembers a
story his grandfather used to tell him. Using this
information, the party learns how to protect itself
from the vampire’s special attacks.

6 PCs come across the vampire while it attacks an
NPC. The creature is not interested in engaging
in a prolonged fight and flees after only a brief
skirmish.

Each of these encounters provides a random event that
serves a role in the development of the story. By preparing
these meetings in advance, and devoting the time to make
them each unique and interesting to the party, they become far
more than a chance to trade blows with haphazard monsters
for no readily apparent reason.

Dramatizing a Random Encounter

Most DMs have read more than their share of “boxed copy,”
the text that’s specifically written to be read to the players, but
when it comes to random encounters, too many referees say
little more than, “Suddenly, a pack of orcs leaps out of the
bushes and brandishes their swords at you—roll for surprise
and initiative.” Even if a straightforward ambush is all the DM
has in mind, the opportunity for role-playing and creative
approaches to the situation are all but lost when the introduc-
tion to the confrontation is so abrupt and colorless. An
encounter setup like the one just mentioned tends to carry the
message that “it’s time to fight now,” pretty much excluding
the possibility of conversing or otherwise dealing with the
monsters. Even worse, the DM is signaling that he or she isn’t
prepared to role-play the incident, and the players are likely to
respond in kind. A role-played random encounter, on the
other hand, usually results in more memorable exchanges,
unexpected alliances, and superior battle strategies in the
event that combat does take place.

A good Dungeon Master always seeks to put the players
into the shoes of their characters, to make them envision the
scene as if they were actually there. By doing so, the players
are more likely to see things from their characters’ points of
view, and are more certain to act accordingly.

It’s not necessary for the random encounter to be laden
with clues or portent. Sometimes it’s perfectly all right for a
DM to describe an encounter to the players in terms that are
absolute and clear. For example, assume that a party in the
FORGOTTEN REALMS” campaign setting is traveling to Calaunt
when the dice indicate a random encounter. The DM checks
the appropriate table and finds that the party has come across
a pair of ogres. Thinking quickly, he or she decides to present
the party with a bridge that spans the narrow river they have
been following. A pair of ogres have taken to robbing those
who use the bridge, and the party must deal with them. The
DM's description of the encounter might be as follows:

Your party comes to a bend in the path. With some concern,
you notice that the singing of the birds in this gentle forest has
suddenly been stilled. Ahead, the path comes to a solidly

built, but poorly tended, wooden bridge that crosses a wide
length of the river you've been following. The water beneath it
looks cold and swift, as does the pair of ogres that stands atop

the bridge. With cruel smiles they each pick up a heavy axe
and lumber toward the party.

“Before humanscum go over bridge they give us shineygold!’
rumbles one of the creatures in a voice heavy with menace.

The intent of this scene is obvious: The party is being chal-
lenged to either pay the toll or engage the monsters in combat
and win their way across the bridge by force of arms. The
scene plays no part in any greater adventure, but it’s a well-
presented and probably entertaining encounter, presenting
possibilities for both role-playing and combat.

Furthermore, there are enough descriptive elements in the
text (the silent birds, the cold water, etc.) to make the narrative
 

Beyond Random Encounters

 

seem fairly vivid to most players. In short, the DM in the
above example has done a fine job of setting out for his or her
players, what they have encountered, and what they must do
to get past it. For their part, the players understand that they
are faced with ogres and can decide on their course of action
based upon the relative wealth, strength, and cleverness of
their characters. A calculated decision can be made and the
game can proceed from there.

But if the DM wishes, he or she can turn a common random
encounter into something that the players will approach and
handle with extreme caution. Read the following block of
boxed text and compare it to the one above.

The narrow path your party follows turns toward the river. It
snakes around a copse of dark and brooding pine trees and
breaks free of the woods at the foot of a wide bridge. Although
the crossing is built of stout wooden logs, signs of neglect and
unrepaired damage dot the structure. It appears that no effort
has been made to maintain this once-fine construction.

The water moving under the bridge is gray and looks very
cold. Here and there, dark shadows flicker just beneath the
surface, moving too quickly for you to tell exactly what causes
them. The water moves swiftly past this point, filling the air
with churning, splashing sounds as it runs over the rocky
shallows along the bank.

As you take in this scene, a sense of uncertainty fills the
party. One by one, you begin to realize that the birds overhead
have grown silent. The sunlight, which had been streaming in
brilliant beams through the scattered branches overhead, has
been blocked off by a single dark cloud. Even the faint hum-
ming of insects and chirping of crickets have faded away. The
air is heavy with the scent of wet earth.

A pair of dark figures rises up from the shadows under the
bridge. As they step into the light, a gasp escapes the lips of
your company. Each of these foul-looking creatures towers
above even the tallest member of vour band. Although
humanoid, these brutes are clearly net human. Their skin is
dark and mottled, and their cold eves gleam with barelv-
restrained bloodlust. The taut muscles of their hulking bodies
ripple as they move toward you. Their mouths hang open
slightly as they draw heavy breaths through yellow, jagged
teeth. A foul odor, like that found in the ruins of a violated
crypt, smothers the sweet smell of pine filling the rest of this
forest. With low growls that sound like the snarl of a mad dog,
they stride toward the party.

Obviously, the second example goes into more detail than the
first one, but more important, it denies the players familiar
game terms, depriving them of standard reactions and
approaches to the problem. To turn any random encounter
into a full-fledged role-playing game, the DM need only bear
in mind the following ideas:

* Environment: Note that both descriptions touch on the set-
ting in which the encounter takes place. In both cases, the
players are able to picture the area around them and use
the information presented in deciding how their characters
will act. In the latter example, however, the environment
becomes more ominous and potentially threatening. For
instance, dark shapes drift beneath the surface of the water
below the bridge—are they harmless fish or lurking hor-
rors? The sun, so recently shining in the sky, is now covered
by a dark cloud—is magic involved? The crickets and birds
have grown silent—is it because of the ogres or is some-
thing else lurking in ambush?

By making the most of the setting description, the DM

can inject a sense of foreboding into the game.

* Mood: Notice that the tone of the first encounter is fairly
upbeat. The ogres are clearly a danger to be faced, but the
scene is presented in such a way as to elevate the party
members to the status of equals: While the ogres are clearly
dangerous monsters, the characters are brave heroes who
have the strength and determination to stand against them.

In the second example, the mood of the text is darker.
The party is presented with information in a way that
makes it seem to them that everything around them is more
powerful than they are. The ogres are described as hulking
creatures with rippling muscles and wicked fangs. An air
of the supernatural hangs about the scene that will make
any party think twice before feeling too cocky.

¢ Monsters: An observant reader will note that the word “ogre”
doesn’t appear in the latter encounter description. It may be
well and good to tell characters in a typical fantasy campaign
that they are fighting an ogre, since it's a part of the everyday
world in which they live. For more moody and realistic
adventures, however, the DM can play up the mystery, avoid-
ing terms and phrases with which players of AD&D games
are familiar. By describing the monsters only as hulking
humanoid creatures, the knowledge is unclear as to what they
are facing. Could they be hill giants? If they're ogres, are they
common ogres or might they be ogre magi? Maybe they're
bugbears or some form of evolutionary throwback—or maybe
they're something altogether new and unknown? Without a
known base of information from which to draw conclusions
about the nature of their enemies, the party members have to
be careful about their choice of tactics and weapons.

A side benefit of this use of descriptive text is that it prevents
players who are obsessed with their own command of the
rules from instantly selecting a standardized attack mode
against a given creature, shattering the mood by announcing,
“Let's see, they’re ogres—about 4 HD apiece—so they must
have about 20 or 25 hit points.” Players who know more about
monsters than their characters, and who are quick to use that
knowledge, often reduce combat to a colorless process of
rolling dice and recording damage. But the DM who intro-
duces creatures and settings in purely descriptive terms makes
it far more difficult for players to decide that they are, in fact,
faced with ogres and not some other, mysterious menace.

¢ Potential solutions: The first scene description makes it
clear to the players what is expected of them. They must
battle the ogres or forfeit their hard-won gold. The second
one presents no such hard and fast solutions to the players.
The PCs will generally assume that these beasts mean them
no good, but can they be certain of it? A few words of wis-
dom from a nonplayer character (NPC), early in the
adventure, cautioning the PCs that “the most valuable
information comes from unexpected sources,” can make
the PCs think twice before committing themselves to any
action. When random encounters are couched in highly
dramatic terms, empty of game-speak, each creature they
meet becomes more important, even if it’s just a stupid,
greedy ogre looking for a few gold pieces.

By withholding obvious solutions to the problems
encountered, the DM leaves the players free to make their
own decisions and assumptions. Not only is this good role-
playing, but it can lead to a far more exciting and challeng-
ing game. By never allowing the players to have all the
information they need (or want), the DM is making the
world around them mysterious and uncertain.
Aballin

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate or tropical / wilderness
or subterranean

FREQUENCY: Uncommon

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)

TREASURE: I

ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1d4

ARMOR CLASS: 4

MOVEMENT: 6, Sw 15

HIT DICE: 3

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: See below

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Drowning

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: L (10° tall)

MORALE: Elite (13-14)

XP VALUE: 270

Also known as living water, aballins are fluid monsters that
entrap and drown creatures who venture within their reach.

In their passive state, aballins give the appearance of large
puddles of seemingly normal water, devoid of fish or other
living creatures. Those looking down at the aballin often
notice coins, jewelry, or other metal effects of the monster's
past victims resting beneath the surface of the water, appar-
ently awaiting recovery. Though they resemble an elemental
creature of Water, aballins are actually comprised of a weak
acid which, over the course of three weeks, digests organic
matter, leaving behind items made of metal. (Because of this,
spells such as water breathing offer no help in surviving the
effect of drowning in their fluids.)

Aballins have no language abilities.

Combat: In its passive state, the aballin is indistinguishable
from fresh water, and it cannot be harmed by attacks that
would otherwise prove harmless to that element. So unthreat-
ening an appearance often results in prey attempting to take a
refreshing drink from one, trying to move through the mon-
ster, or reaching in to recover tempting valuables. Any of these
actions rouse the aballin, and the creature instantly alters its
molecular structure into a gelatinous pseudopod, which
lashes out and tries to envelop its victim. If its attack roll suc-
ceeds, a man-sized or smaller creature is drawn in and begins
to drown (see “Holding Your Breath” in the Player's Handbook
for the effects of drowning).

While in this gelatinous state, the aballin is susceptible to
attacks by blunt weapons of +1 or greater enchantment. Edged
weapons have no effect whatsoever, and pose a 25% risk of
striking any person trapped within the aballin’s amoeboid
form. Those within the form may attack, but cannot escape the
suffocation attack or use items requiring normal speech (such
as spells). An aballin attacks only one individual at a time.

The aballin is immune to fire, cold, electricity, poison, and

 

 

 

 

 

paralysis. A transmute water to dust spell forces an aballin to
make a saving throw vs. death magic; if it fails, the creature
perishes. A lower water spell requires the creature to make a
successful save vs. spell or release its victim immediately.
Aballins have no eyes, but keep track of their victims
through scent and vibration. Hence, they are immune to all
spells or attacks that alter vision or affect the subject through
vision, including blindness, blur, color spray, fire charm, hypnotic
pattern, invisibility, most illusions, and many other spells.

Habitat/Society: While sometimes seen masquerading as a
puddle, small pond, fountain, or even a drainage ditch, an
aballin is most often encountered in damp, cavernous areas
with an abundance of water, which permit it to blend with its
surroundings. While in the element of water, the monster is
naturally invisible, so it prefers to rest within the shelter of
pools or other small bodies of water.

The aballin traverses lakes, rivers, or streams in search of
food. It may also move slowly upon land by oozing or by labo-
riously extending its gelatinous pseudopods and inching for-
ward, much like a slug. (In fact, like the slug, the aballin leaves
a faintly discernible slimy trail when traveling upon land.)
Due to its semiliquid composition, the creature is incapable of
ascending surfaces with a slope greater than 30°.

Aballins are encountered singly or in families of up to four.
Mated pairs may function as a single entity, with doubled size
and Hit Dice, particularly if there are young present.

Ecology: These monsters can prove useful in keeping down
the population of other harmful creatures or plants that might
be found in or near water. They also function as scavengers,
digesting remains that they happen upon in their travels.

 
eee

 

 

Abyss Ants

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: The Abyss, or temperate forests,
hills, and plains of the Prime Mate-
rial Plane

FREQUENCY: Uncommon (Abyss) or very rare
(Prime)

ORGANIZATION: Colony

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)

TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil

NO. APPEARING: 56 (x10)

ARMOR CLASS: 5

MOVEMENT: 18

HIT DICE: 3

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d6 (bite) / 1d6+2 (sting)

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spit acid

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: S (2° long)
MORALE: Fearless (19-20)
XP VALUE: 175

This vicious form of vermin hails from the Abyss, on the Outer
Planes. Abyss ants are about the same size and shape as giant
ants, but their piebald coloration of putrid pink and fish-belly
white immediately alerts the observer to the difference.

These creatures enjoy a limited form of telepathy among
themselves within 600 feet, but they speak no languages.

Combat: Abyss ants bite and sting in battle, the latter deliver-
ing an acidic poison that delivers the additional 2 points of
damage listed above (no save). They are also able to spit an
acidic goo up to 10 feet away, three times per day, inflicting
2d4 points of damage upon a successful hit (targets are
allowed a save vs. wand to avoid damage). Thanks to their
telepathy, the entire colony is alerted when any one of its
members is attacked, and will rush to aid the beleaguered ant.
The ants also have the ability to organize reinforcements
before initiating an attack. In actual melee, instead of attacking
a group of adversaries as a whole, they direct their offense at a
single target, allowing them to bring down even the largest of
creatures—if an adventuring party encounters a nest of Abyss
ants, they swarm a single, randomly chosen person until he or
she is incapacitated or dead, then move on to the next.

Habitat/Society: Abyss ants are found on many layers of the
Abyss, but they appear on the Prime Material Plane when
deliberately summoned by evil spellcasters. Tanar'ri occasion-
ally rid themselves of a troublesome colony by gating it to the
Prime Material.

A colony appears much the same as a giant ant nest: The
creatures lair underground, in a series of chambers and pas-
sages with mounds of dirt and pebbles marking the entrances.
Abyss ants dig deep, wide nests as far as 50 feet below the sur-
face, and the entire nest may spread over an area exceeding

_

 

 

 

 

 

thousands of square yards. A typical nest may contain as
many as 300 worker/ warriors and a single queen. The queen
(MV 1, HD 6) appears as a huge, bloated version of a normal
Abyss ant. She has no stinger, but is able to bite and spit acid.
She is responsible only for deciding where to establish the
nest, then laying eggs to perpetuate it. The worker/ warriors
defend the queen and colony, gather food, attend the eggs and
larvae, and establish the ecosystem (see “Ecology”) around the
nest. At any one time, 60% of the colony is above ground,
while 40% remains below. The queen always has an entourage
of 2d10 guards and servants in her chamber.

Ecology: Abyss ants are ferociously territorial and actually
establish their own ecosystem around the colony. Their diame-
ter of the territory is usually 1,000 yards for every 50 ants in
the nest; the size may vary according to local terrain and abun-
dance of food supplies. The ants patrol the perimeter and
allow nothing to live within their circle that does not serve
their needs. Small groups of 1d6 + 4 ants often scout as far as
1d4 + 6 miles beyond the perimeter to maintain security.

The ants are of low Intelligence, but they understand the
advantages of domesticating and maintaining a steady source
of food. Hence, they establish and tend herds of cattle, deer,
horses, humans, demihumans, humanoids, or whatever else is
handy. All predators, wandering animals, insects, weeds, and
even trees and bushes are carefully eradicated. Sentries watch
the herd continuously. They kill and devour the herd as
needed, dissolving the victims completely with their acidic
goo. The resulting “flesh pudding” is shared by the entire
colony; any character devoured by the ants is gone forever
and cannot be reincarnated or resurrected.

The gooey acid produced by these creatures is a primary
ingredient in universal solvent.
Afanc

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Warm ocean waters
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: See below
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: l

ARMOR CLASS: 6

MOVEMENT: Sw 15 (see below)
HIT DICE: 15

THACO: 5

NO. OF ATTACKS: lor2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 5d4 or 3d4 (x2)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Whirlpool, swallows whole

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: G (50’ long)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 11,000

This huge fish is greatly feared for its ability to create
whirlpools. The afanc’s body is gray or blue-gray, and its
scales blend very smoothly. This and its great size lead many
to confuse the creature with a whale when it is first sighted.
The afanc’s vertical tail and its head—wide-mouthed with
obvious gills—make it clear that the creature is a fish.

Afanc are somewhat intelligent, and some sailors tell of
specimens that have learned to speak (and even sing) human
tongues in loud, gravelly voices. These afanc are said to use
their voices to lead sailors into danger.

Combat: An afanc seldom hunts for prey, preferring to feed on
those who would hunt it. It is usually encountered in shallow
salt water, where it leisurely swims along at the surface of the
ocean, waiting to be mistaken for a whale. When approached
by a vessel between 30 and 60 feet in length, the afanc attacks
by swimming rapidly around it in ever-closing circles, creat-
ing a whirlpool that pulls the craft into the depths. It begins by
circling its target at its normal movement rate, from a distance
of 100 feet. At this time it is near the surface of the water, but
the partial cover of the water imposes a -2 penalty upon mis-
sile attack rolls (in addition to any range modifiers). Those
who attempt to melee with the afanc cause the creature to
break off its attack on the ship and attempt to eat them

The afanc requires 1d4 + 4 rounds to create a whirlpool.
Each round it moves faster, closing to within 40 feet of the ves-
sel, while the ship spins faster and the afanc gains depth,
increasing missile attack penalties by —2 per round (to a maxi-
mum penalty of -12). The great fish ev entually reaches a
movement rate of 30 and creates a whirlpool that draws the
ship underwater after a period equal to one round per 10 feet
of length. The attack is partially magical in nature, so a dispel
magic spell cast on the afanc, or some sort of magic resistance
on the ship, decreases the rate of sinking by half (one round
per 5 feet of ship length).

 

 

 

 

 

Seagoing vessels more than 60 feet long are generally
unmolested, but they may be rammed by the creature. Boats
and rafts less than 30 feet long are almost always rammed in
an attempt to capsize them. A vessel is considered AC 5 (AC 3
if evading). If the afanc’s attack roll is at least 4 more than the
number needed to hit, the ship capsizes. At the DM’s whim,
extraordinary materials or magical aid can add toa ship’s AC.
When a ship is rammed, a successful saving throw vs. crush-
ing blow must be rolled or the ship sinks in 1d10 rounds. Most
hulls are treated as thin wood for the saving throw, meaning a
13 or greater must be rolled to avoid sinking.

The afanc attacks those who try to escape a sinking ship,
inflicting 3d4 damage with each front flipper and 5d4 damage
with its bite. If the creature’s attack roll on a bite is at least 4
more than the roll needed to hit, it swallows victims of size L
and smaller. A swallowed creature dies in six rounds and is
completely digested in two hours.

Anyone trapped inside an afanc can attempt to cut an
escape route. Its interior is AC 8, but the creature’s digestive
juices weaken the victim each round, imposing a cumulative
-1 penalty to the damage a victim can inflict.

Habitat/Society: Though native to salt water, the afanc enters
the mouth of a large river to lay its eggs. The eggs are a deli-
cacy to many creatures, including humans.

Ecology: The afanc is a dangerous predator with few natural
enemies. Humans have many uses for its scales and bones,
however, using them for weapons and decorations.

Young afanc: Young afanc (up to 15 feet long) may inhabit
rivers. They have 5 HD each and roam in packs of 3d6 mem-
bers. Six or more can form a whirlpool equivalent to an
adult's. Their flipper damage is 1d4 and bite damage is 3d4.
Al-Jahar (Dazzle)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Warm urban areas
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Special
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)
TREASURE: O,Q
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil
NO, APPEARING: l

ARMOR CLASS: 8
MOVEMENT: 12, Fl 12(B)
HIT DICE: 5

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK;: 1d6 (x2)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spells
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Disguise
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 20%

SIZE: M (5’~7" tall)
MORALE: Unsteady (5-7)
XP VALUE: 3,000

Dazzles hide among the populations of cities, generating and
feeding upon base emotions of other intelligent creatures.
They usually appear as attractive humanoids, often seeming
to be a lovely human or elf woman, but their angelic beauty
hides inner evil and manipulation. The creatures’ true form is
that of genderless, winged humanoids comprised of sparkling
white motes and waves of almost invisible heat.

Combat: A dazzle prefers to avoid direct combat, though it
often encourages others to fight, for it feeds upon strong emo-
tions. If anger, greed, or lust is present, the dazzle absorbs it; if
not, the creature attempts to generate it. Once per round, the
dazzle can use one of the following spell-like abilities: charm
person, friends, hypnotism, taunt, confusion, or ventriloquism.
Each ability can be used up to three times per day. They are
cast as if the dazzle is a 10th-level wizard. Favored dazzle tac-
tics include using friends to get someone to look in its eyes,
then /iypnotism to cause the victim to start a fight; using alter
self to assume a friendly form, then taunt to start a fight; and
using ventriloquism to make bystanders appear to toss insults.

The creature can alter self at will, so many disguises are pos-
sible, including males or females of most man-sized bipedal
races. Dazzles can also use delude and nondetection at will.
Genies and gen have a 50% chance of recognizing a dazzle, so
it always avoids them.

If discovered, a dazzle attempts a fast escape, often assum-
ing its real form so it can fly. If pressed, it can fight with its
claws and is able to use one of the following abilities each
round: light and shocking grasp (three times per day each), and
blindness, rainbow pattern, and domination (once per day each).
The latter three abilities can be used only in the creature’s nat-
ural form—all of them function at 10th level. A dazzle is
immune to light-generating and emotion-affecting spells and
effects, except the sun-sparkle gaze of the opinicus (q.v.).

Victims are affected very little by a dazzle, at most feeling

 

 

 

 

 

exhausted and emotionally drained after several hours in the
creature’s presence. If the dazzle is careful, it can prey on the
same people for years without their ever realizing the truth.

Habitat/Society: Dazzles prefer to live in large cities, where
they have plenty of prey and can live for years without being
discovered. Smaller towns often quickly realize that some-
thing is amiss and drive the dazzles away.

A dazzle generally has a few standard guises, with a per-
sonality for each. It often claims a territory like a dockside tav-
ern, where fights are common and easy to incite. Other
dazzles are not welcome in this territory, and may be attacked
if they intrude.

Though usually found in a thriving metropolis, a dazzle
may be encountered, alone and very hungry, in ruined cities as
well. If a dazzle does not feed on strong emotions regularly, it
weakens until it’s only able to use its disguise abilities. When
discovered in ruins, a dazzle adopts the guise of a lost traveler
and tries to gain the confidence of rescuers so they will take it
to a populated area. In the meantime, it feeds on their suspi-
cion and other emotions to gain enough energy for manipula-
tion and travel on its own. Dazzles have even been known to
join adventuring parties for a short time, using their powers to
protect themselves, aid the party in small ways, and feed off
the party members’ emotions.

Dazzles are not known to breed, so it is suspected that there
is a limited number of them in existence.

Ecology: Because the dazzle’s food supply is so unusual, it has
little effect upon any ecology, though its hunting patterns are
often disruptive to the society in which it lives.

A dazzle’s blood is useful in making a potion of delusion and
other mind-affecting magical items.
Baelnorn

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any temperate land

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Nil

INTELLIGENCE: As in life (17-20)

TREASURE: Any (as guardian)

ALIGNMENT: Lawful good (15% are lawful
neutral)

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 0

MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 9+6

THACO: 11

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d10 or by weapon

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spells

SPECIAL DEFENSES: _ +1 or better weapon to hit

MAGIC RESISTANCE: = 50%

SIZE: M (5’ tall)

MORALE Fearless (20)

XP VALUE 10,000

Baelnorn are elves who have sought undeath to serve their
families, communities, or other purposes (usually to see a
wrong righted, or to achieve a certain magical discovery or
deed). They are lichlike creatures that appear as tall, impres-
sive-looking elves with shriveled skin and glowing white
eyes. Most baelnorn keep to the crypts, ruins, or mage-towers
they guard or work in, and they are never seen except by those
who intrude into such places.

Combat: Baelnorn do not project a terrifying aura as do liches,
but the chill of their unlife inflicts the same touch damage
(plus paralysis if the victim fails a save). However, some go
armed into battle if they possess magical weapons that cause
greater damage than their touch. They employ spells as they
did in life (most were 15th-level wizards), using spellbooks
and magical components, but many develop variant spells
that don’t require material components. Most baelnorn have
developed rare and strange spells lost to today’s mages. They
also employ magical items.

Baelnorn can be hit only by +1 or better magical weapons,
by magical beings, or by creatures with 6 or more Hit Dice.
They are immune to charming, cold-based spells, death (and
related) magic, disintegrate, electricity, enfeeblement, feeble-
mind, hold (and related magic), insanity, and sleep spells. Nei-
ther nonintelligent animals nor undead willingly attack a
baelnorn.

Baelnorn have a special power: Thrice per day, up to five
turns at a time, and without employing a spell to do it, they
can use a project image power to send a wraithlike likeness of
themselves, called a sending, up to a mile distant. Baelnorn can
see through these images with their normal 90-foot infravi-
sion, and into the Ethereal Plane too. They can also hear and
speak through them, and can even cast spells (the image
serves as the source of the spell). This link transcends physical
and all known magical barriers, and it can even cross the

 

 

 

 

 

boundaries between the Prime Material and Ethereal Planes.

A sending is AC 0, MV FI 9(A), and has the hit points of the
baelnorn itself, but lacks the ability to carry solid objects
(including weapons or items), turn undead, or inflict damage
by touch. Only half the damage (round down) suffered by a
baelnorn’s sending is borne by the creature itself. A sending
vanishes at the baelnorn’s will or when it is killed; it cannot be
turned or magically dispelled. A sending can push against or
move small things, so it may push its finger through sand or
ashes to write a message, or turn a page of an open book, but it
has insufficient mass to carry things. A baelnorn can have only
one sending in operation at a time.

These creatures are turned as liches (although they cannot
be turned while in the area they guard or are linked to), and
they themselves turn undead as 14th-level priests.

Habitat/Society: Baelnorn spend their existences diligently
working at whatever task they find important enough to
endure undeath for. If they guard a place or an item of power,
they typically spend centuries laying traps, placing items at
the ready, setting spell triggers, creating or summoning
guardian monsters, and formulating defensive strategies.
Many baelnorn have no interest in combat, but they are both
fearless and brilliant and will always do whatever best serves
their task.

Ecology: Baelnorn do not have phylacteries, but many have
specialized clones that are activated if they are destroyed.
(They pass into a spirit trap, created by a powerful and secret
7th-level spell, and then are whisked into their next body.)
The process by which elves become baelnorn is old, secret,
and complicated. They have never been numerous, and none
have been created in recorded history. Baelnorn do not eat,
drink, excrete, or breathe, and nothing preys upon them.
Baneguard

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any land
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: None
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: Vv
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: 1d10

ARMOR CLASS: 7
MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 4+4

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d6 or by weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Magic missile

SPECIAL DEFENSES: _ Blink

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: As for skeleton type
SIZE: M (5'-6" tall)
MORALE: Steady (11-12)

XP VALUE: 975

Baneguards are skeletons, usually but not always human,
which are animated by clerical spells to serve as guardian
creatures. The create baneguard spell was originally researched
by priests of Bane (of the FORGOTTEN REALMS setting), but in
the years since the demise of that deity, the secret of the spell
has been spread such that many other evil (and not-so-evil)
deities allow their priests to use it.

Usually found as guardians, baneguards are identical in
appearance to normal skeletons, but have additional deadly
powers which they reveal in combat.

Combat: All baneguards are silent but intelligent, evil ser-
vants, capable of independent, reasoned, malevolent behavior.
They can blink (as the 3rd-level wizard spell) once per turn.
This effect lasts up to four rounds and must be continuous—it
cannot be stopped and then resumed; once ended, a full turn
must pass before the baneguard can blink again.

Baneguards can also cast one magic missile spell every three
rounds. Each spell creates two missiles that inflict 1d4 + 1 points
of damage each. They streak forth from the baneguard’s bony
fingertips (or any extremity if the fingers are missing) and can be
directed at separate targets up to 60 feet away.

Baneguards can use all normal weapons or strike with a
hand for 1d6 points of damage. Most are armed with swords
or maces. Baneguards can employ all magical items that do
not require verbal commands or living flesh or organs (e.g.,
ointments and potions).

Baneguards suffer damage from edged weapons, fire, spells,
and holy water as normal skeletons do. They may break off com-
bat if their orders permit. Baneguards are turned as wights.

Habitat/Society: Since baneguards are created, they have no
society. They go where and do as they are commanded. They
are used primarily by evil priests, but neutral-aligned priests
(particularly those who venerate gods of death) with a ready
supply of skeletal remains use baneguards as well.

 

 

 

 

 

Ecology: Baneguards eat nothing and do not contribute to the
ecosystem in any way. As manufactured creatures, they have
no natural habitat. As guardian creatures, they are found
wherever they have been placed by their creators,

Direguards

Some baneguards wear black, shadowy armor that is semi-
transparent so their bones show through, and red flames burn
in their eye sockets. These direguards are AC 6, can see invisi-
ble objects and creatures, and are turned as wraiths. The create
direguard spell is as the create baneguard, but is a 7th-level spell
and has a casting time of one round. Direguards have an XP
value of 1,200 each.

Create Baneguard

6th-level Priest Spell

Sphere: Necromantic

Range: Touch

Components: V, 5, M
Duration: Special

Casting Time: 9

Area of Effect: 1 skeletal body
Saving Throw: None

The casting of this spell transforms an inanimate skeleton of
size M or smaller into a baneguard, gifted with a degree of
malicious intelligence. Only one baneguard may be created at
a time with this spell. The baneguard is capable of using its
abilities in the round following creation, and it needs no spe-
cial commands to attack.

The material components of this spell are the holy symbol
of the priest and at least 20 drops of blood from any sort of
true dragon.
Banelar

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Hot to temperate/land or water

FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary or small bands

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional to Genius (15-18)

TREASURE: Any (especially Q, V)

ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil

NO. APPEARING: 1d4

ARMOR CLASS: 6 (head and stinger: 3; tentacles
1)

MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 74+7

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: Up to5

 

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d3 plus venom (bite) /2d4 plus
venom (sting)/by weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spells, poison, magical items

SPECIAL DEFENSES:

Regeneration (1 hp/round)

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: H (20’-25’ long)
MORALE: Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: 3,000

Banelar are evil, nagalike creatures found on the land and in
the water throughout warmer regions. Named for the many
alliances between themselves and priests of the god Bane,
banelar are native to the Prime Material Plane. They are quite
independent in nature, and not all serve or obey servants of
Bane.

Banelar have dark, snakelike bodies and large humanoid
heads. They are dark purple-green in color, with green-white,
glistening eyes and a brownish tail. Tiny tentacles grow in a
ring about their banelar mouths; these are too weak to wield
weapons, but they can wear, manipulate, or carry minor items
such as rings, keys, wands, and bits of food. Banelar can
breathe air and water, alike, without harm or hesitation.

Banelar speak Common and Orcish in horrid, hissing
voices.

Combat: A banelar casts spells as a 6th-level cleric and a 6th-
level mage with no ability-score bonuses. Thus, it has the fol-
lowing spell capacities: wizard—4/2/2, and priest—3/3/2. A
banelar can utter one spell per round in addition to making
physical and weapon attacks. Banelar spells are verbal only,
modified so that no material components are required, involy-
ing an increase of 3 to the casting time in all cases. Such spells
must be found or learned from dragons, other banelar, or sim-
ilar creatures that employ verbal-only magic.

A banelar can wield any magical item it happens to possess
(up to the size and weight of a rod), regardless of class limita-
tions (but alignment restrictions on weapons still apply). A
banelar can also wear amulets and magical rings on its tenta-
cles, with the usual maximum of two at any one time. Peri-
apts, however, will not fit on banelar tentacles and confer no
magical effects.

A banelar’s bite and tail sting deliver poison to the wounds
they inflict, turning the victim's skin blue and sustaining the

 

 

 

 

 

above-listed damage. The casualty must then successfully
save vs. poison or suffer unconsciousness for 1d4 + 1 turns
and 2d6 points of additional damage.

Habitat/Society: Banelar tend to be selfish and solitary, but
they sometimes cooperate with both “lesser” creatures (such
as humans, orcs, and hobgoblins) and “greater” ones (behold-
ers, liches, evil dragons, and even vampires) for common gain
or to fight a specific foe. They are extremely paranoid, always
planning against “sneak attacks” and seeking to strengthen
their personal weaknesses and defenses. To do so, banelar col-
lect and hoard treasure—particularly magical items—to use
and trade for services, or to provide safety from powerful ene-
mies. Banelar are wily and treacherous, adhering to the letter,
and not the intent, of any bargain they make. They see nothing
wrong in commanding or forcing their own servant creatures
to break bargains.

Ecology: Banelar have been known to steal and tend entire
herds of livestock for their own larders, and they can dine
with perfect safety upon snakes and other creatures that gen-
erate poisons and acids (to which banelar seem immune).
Banelar are also highly resistant to petrification (+3 to all
saves). As hermaphrodites, they each give live birth to a single
offspring each winter. A banelar parent hunts with its hungry
offspring, and teaches the youth spells until it is able to fend
for itself, whereupon it leaves and seeks its own territory. Typ-
ically, a banelar mates whenever it encounters another, and it
avoids fighting others of its kind. Beyond this, it avoids con-
sorting with its fellows unless weakened or frightened. A
banelar parent tends to raise its young in undersea or moun-
tain caves, far from its usual haunts. This allows it to return to
its favorite areas with little fear of being found after it sneaks
away and leaves its young.
Bird, Talking

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any land
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Genius (17-18)
TREASURE: U
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1
ARMOR CLASS: 6
MOVEMENT: 6, FI 18(C)
HIT DICE: 5

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: I
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d8

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 50%

SIZE: S (2’ tall, 4° wingspan)
MORALE: Unsteady (5-7)

XP VALUE: 1,400

The talking bird is large-billed and looks something like a tou-
can crossed with a parrot.

These creatures speak Common and learn to speak many
other languages during their lives; there is a 75% chance they
can speak any particular language. Their speaking voice is
calm and melodious. Their singing voice is also very beautiful,
and it attracts other singing birds to the area so they might join
in chorus with the talking bird.

Combat: Talking birds avoid combat, usually by flying away,
though they can defend themselves, and they do attack small
animals for food. The sharp bill of a talking bird inflicts 1d8
points of damage.

Habitat/Society: These intelligent birds have very long life
spans, which they spend gathering knowledge about the
world. They sometimes offer wise advice to weary travelers,
and they know instantly if someone has honor. If approached
politely by such a person, they answer all manner of ques-
tions. A talking bird has knowledge equivalent to that

afforded by the local history nonweapon proficiency; many of

them have ancient history and other Intelligence-based profi-
ciencies as well.

Legends hold that the first talking bird was placed in the
world to help the worthy. Now, though they are still quite rare,
there are several talking birds. They can be found almost any-
where, but prefer to live in forested areas, and many seem to
be assigned by unknown forces to wait in certain places.

Some of them wait to give advice to any who pass through
the area, while others wait for a specific person who will take
them away. A few serve as wise advisors and teachers to hon-
orable and deserving people; for these chosen few, the talking
bird answers many questions indeed. One question never
answered by a talking bird is, “What do the gods have in store
for me?” This question and its many variations are invariably
answered with, “Only the gods know for sure.”

 

 

 

 

 

On the rare occasions when a male and a female talking
bird meet (perhaps once every 50 years), they go through an
elaborate mating dance that lasts for up to one week. The
female then lays a single egg, one year after mating, which
hatches almost five years later. Newly hatched talking birds
are as beautiful as their parents, but must be taught like all
infants. They are usually taught new languages by their
mother. Other information they learn by traveling and observ-
ing, but they usually avoid contact with other species until
they have lived for at least 50 years, so they will have wisdom
and information to offer. They can live for centuries, and some
claim to be more than a millennium old.

The talking bird sometimes lives near, or even in, a singing
tree (q.v.). They have an almost symbiotic relationship, for the
singing of a talking bird attracts other breeds of bird, and these
feed the singing tree. (The singing tree never attacks the talk-
ing bird, and it’s careful to feed lightly on other birds so as to
kill only a few of them.) The talking bird, in return, eats any
pests that may harm the tree, and is defended from predators
by the singing tree’s leaves.

Ecology: The talking bird tries to ensure that all nearby resi-
dents live in relative harmony. They are not great predators,
but they are rarely prey either—they are fairly able to defend
themselves. Most unintelligent predators seem to regard them
with something akin to awe, and would attack only under the
worst circumstances.

Talking birds care little for treasure, but many have gath-
ered a few items that they keep hidden. Those favored by the
gods often have a gem or a necessary magical item, which
they may present as a gift to worthy adventurers.

The value of a talking bird varies greatly. They are of
immeasurable value to people who have high regard for their
rarity, beauty, and wisdom.
Blazing Bones

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any land
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Nil
INTELLIGENCE: As in life (very-genius, 11-18), but
insane
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1
ARMOR CLASS: 5
MOVEMENT: 12
HIT DICE: 5+5
THACO: 15
NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4+2 (x2)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Hurling fire
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below
SIZE: M (average 6’ tall)
MORALE: Fearless (20)
XP VALUE: 3,000

Blazing bones are undead accidentally created when a priest
or wizard who has prepared or partially prepared contingency
magic to prevent death is killed by fiery damage. The casted
magic twists the contingency provisions so the unfortunate
victim passes into undeath in the heart of a roaring column of
flame. Tormented by the endless agony of fire, the priest or
wizard's nature (including alignment, Hit Dice, and thoughts)
changes. Hurling flame lessens the pain momentarily, and
pouring fire into another living being reduces it considerably,
so blazing bones soon become stalking killers, exulting in fiery
destruction.

A blazing bones appears as a human skeleton with a nim-
bus of flames dancing along its shoulders and small balls of
flame encircling its hands.

Combat: Blazing bones inflict only 1d4 points of damage per
blow to creatures immune to fire, but against all others they
strike fiery blows, adding 2 points of damage to each hit. In
any round, one of them may forgo one of its hand attacks in
favor of hurling a head-sized ball of expanding flames up to
20 feet distant, dealing 1d6 + 3 damage to creatures struck,
igniting flammable things, and forcing item saving throws vs.
magical fire. (Handle misses with the scatter diagram—see
“Grenade-like Missiles” in the DMG.) The blazing bones can
also (once per turn) forgo both attacks to create a firestorm,
collapsing into a whirlwind of bones and flames that act as a
fireball (6d6 damage, save for half damage) which erupts from
where they stand and expands to a 30-foot-radius sphere. A
blazing bones may try to embrace a foe before erupting into a
firestorm; in this case, it is allowed an attack roll. Success indi-
cates that it strikes the target (no saving throw allowed), and
failure means that it misses—consult the scatter diagram.
Blazing bones are immune to all fire and heat damage, and
magical heat and fire actually augment their hit points. Treat
all damage normally inflicted by such magic as hit points

 

 

 

 

 

gained, first healing any missing points and then permanently
raising the monster's hit-point total. For each 8 hp gained by a
blazing bones, it gains 1 Hit Die.

Blazing bones are turned as ghasts and are immune to
charm, hold, and sleep spells. Cold-based attacks inflict normal
damage, holy water causes 4d4 points of damage per vial (2d4
if only a splash), and normal water inflicts 2d4 points of dam-
age per bucket (1d4 per splash). Alcoholic liquids do not dam-
age a blazing bones. Blunt weapons impose normal damage,
but edged or piercing weapons inflict only half damage.

Habitat/Society: Blazing bones hate life and the happiness of
others. Some former priests even believe their fiery attacks
cleanse the world around them, if one can judge by the words
they howl—they can roar crackling words from their empty
mouths, and they often taunt or threaten adversaries. Blazing
bones avoid each other and all other types of undead. How-
ever, if a battle with other undead is forced upon them, their
flames inflict double damage upon “cold” undead such as
vampires, liches, wights, and ghouls.

There have been cases where evil archmages or high priests
have deliberately created blazing bones as guardians, by slay-
ing underling wizards or priests after laying control magic on
them. In such cases, blazing bones may be found in groups of
as many as eight. They can never be directly controlled by
their creator. However, they can be compelled to remain
within a certain area or structure, and not attack their creator.

Ecology: Blazing bones are among the most destructive of
undead, They serve no purpose in the cycles of life, save to
burn and spur renewal as forest fires do, Their fire can cleanse
away disease germs, and at least one archmage has used a
blazing bones as a walking garbage-furnace.

 
 

 

Campestri

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Saltwater swamps
FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Herd

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day (inactive in bright sunlight)
DIET: Herbivore

INTELLIGENCE: Semi- (2-4)

TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 4d6 per herd

ARMOR CLASS: 8

MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 1

THACO: 20

NO. OF ATTACKS: l

DAMAGE/ATTACK: l ae

SPECIAL ATTACKS:
SPECIAL DEFENSES:

Spores, sound imitation
Surprised only on 1 or 2

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: T-5 (3° per hp)
MORALE: Unsteady (5-7)
XP VALUE: 65

Campestris resemble myconids (see the MONSTROUS MANUAL
tome) without arms and have a stronger resemblance to mush-
rooms than their more highly evolved cousins. Campestris are
happy-go-lucky creatures with few cares or worries, The fun-
gus creatures are a bit smarter than a domestic cat—just smart
enough to have developed a warped sense of humor and some
rudimentary powers of reason. Each “herd” of mushrooms
also has a collective intelligence equal to about 6-7 on the
Intelligence scale. A druid or other character with the herbal-
ism proficiency may have heard of the dancing mushrooms in
old legends, but PCs should not have any specific information
about campestri habits and abilities.

Campestris vary widely in color, from white to tan to dark
brown, but they always have red or purple caps and speckles.
They move by expanding and contracting their “root-balls.”

Combat: Once per day, each campestri can release a cloud of
spores that acts as a slow spell upon all creatures within a 10-
foot radius. The effect lasts for 1d4 + 4 rounds (save vs. spell
for half duration). Campestris are very sensitive to sound and
vibrations, so they are surprised only ona roll of 1 or 2.

Campestris can butt creatures at a high rate of speed for a
single point of damage, but they use this attack mainly as a
distraction. They will also swarm spellcasters this way to pre-
vent spellcasting.

Habitat/Society: Campestris are captivated by any sort of
singing, even incredibly bad singing. If anyone sings or plays
an instrument, the campestris will happily sing along. The
mushrooms can easily imitate both words and music. Once
they have run through a song or piece of music three or four
times, they remember it, although they have a tendency to mix
and match parts of different tunes. The campestris will dance
all around whoever is singing to them, enjoying themselves
immensely. If one of the PCs sings a song to the campestris,

_

 

 

 

 

 

the DM should sing back the words a little warped. For exam-
ple, suppose a PC bard sings, “Mary had a little lamb, whose
fleece was white as snow” (one of the campestris’ all-time
favorites). In response, the campestris madly caper around the
PC while singing, “Murray hada weedleam, hoose fleas was
wideasno!” (The DM should repeat the lyrics in an obnoxious,
nasal falsetto, twisting them in a new way each time until he
or she gets tired or the players start to throw things.)

If the PC bard puts up with the campestris’ sometimes
annoying habits and teaches them to sing on key (a very
patient bard might even be able to get them to sing and dance
like a chorus line), the DM can award a bonus of 150 XP for
good role-playing. If the player does an exceptional job (if
everyone at the gaming session laughs), the PC might deserve
200-300 XP. In order to earn this bonus, the player should
actually sing the song that the character wants to teach the
campestris. Player talent does not count here, only that the
player is willing to sing. The DM's own judgment determines
when the PC bard has put enough effort into teaching the
campestris to sing.

Ecology: Campestris are very useful creatures to have around,
if one happens to live in an area with salty soil. The mushroom
creatures “eat” salty soil, filter out the salt, and excrete a slip-
pery paste of purified soil (stripped of things nourishing to
fungus, of course).

Eating salt also serves as a defense mechanism because it
makes campestris taste as salty as caviar. Bullywugs consider
them a delicacy, but most other intelligent creatures avoid
them.
Carrionette

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any town or city
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary or pack
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO, APPEARING: 1 or 2d4
ARMOR CLASS: 6
MOVEMENT: 6

HIT DICE: 2

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: ]

 

DAMAGE/ATTACK: ]

 

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Paralyzation, possession
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: T (6"—2’ tall)

MORALE: Fearless (20)

XP VALUE: 975

Carrionettes are living, animated puppets or marionettes.
They are essentially wooden dolls, painted and clothed, that
have come to life. All of their limbs are jointed and have small
eye-holes for a puppeteer’s strings. They can look like any-
thing, from clowns to knights to farm animals; most look like
people. The voice of a carrionette is hollow and shrill.

Combat: A carrionette must have a miniature, sharp weapon
with which to attack and cause damage; they cannot use blunt
weapons. They can only inflict 1 point of damage per attack,
and the nature of each weapon does not affect the amount of
damage. Typical weapons for carrionettes are large sewing
needles, small kitchen knives, razor blades, etc.

Each carrionette carries a small quiver of 10 silver needles,
which are not magical in themselves. The puppets can throw
these needles like spears, aiming at a leg or an arm. The needle
has a maximum range of 15 feet and trails a magical silver
cord attached to the carrionette’s hand. It carries no damage,
but a struck character must make a saving throw vs. paralyza-
tion. If the roll fails, that limb becomes paralyzed and the sil-
ver cord becomes invisible. A character who has a single
paralyzed leg moves at half speed. If the character can remove
the needle, he regains use of that limb in 1d4 rounds.

An immobilized character, whether paralyzed, asleep, or
unconscious, is particularly vulnerable to the carrionette. The
evil puppet can drive a needle into the base of the character’s
neck, which has the effect of transposing the essence of the
carrionette and the victim. The person inhabiting the doll’s
body is inanimate for a full hour after the transferral, while the
carrionette in the person's body is unconscious for only a
round, after which it can remove all the needles.

The carrionette has two other special abilities: It can climb
walls like a thief, with an 85% chance of success (95% with
string or thread), and the carrionette is able to use ventrilo-
quism at will. The monster is immune to poison, cold, electric-

 

 

 

 

 

 

destroys it.

The carrionette cannot destroy its doll body following a
transpossession, for that would kill its own essence as well as
the life force of the person within. Therefore, the carrionette
tends to lock up its former body or send it far away. To reverse
the process, a silver needle must be driven into the live body
(inflicting no damage). The doll body must hold either the
needle or a silver wire no more than 15 feet long, attached to
the needle. The doll’s essence is then returned to its body,
which remains inert for an hour, and the person’s essence is
returned to his own body and is active again in a round.

Habitat/Society: Carrionettes are parasites that live off
humans and human society. They tend to hide in plain sight,
such as in children’s toy rooms, toy shops, theaters, or other
places where toys and marionettes are not unusual. They can
remain inanimate for extremely long periods of time, until
they find a reason to exert their free will.

The carrionette is driven by a single desire: to get a host.
They desperately want to have a living body. Usually they
operate in packs to drag down the bodies of the living, but
they are known to operate alone. Carrionettes have no social
structure. They do not interact with each other except when in
a pack. Once the carrionette has a human body, it ignores
other carrionettes, though it is capable of detecting their pres-
ence.

Ecology: A carrionette can be made of any material, but typi-
cal components include wood, straw, ceramic clay, cloth, and
tin. For game purposes they are all treated the same. It takes a
month to craft a carrionette body, and only a dedicated crafts-
man can do it right. Those who would construct one must fol-
low the normal rules set down for creating golems.
 

Cat, Winged

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Greater Lesser Tressym
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate hills and grasslands Any land Any temperate land
FREQUENCY: Very rare Very rare Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Family group Solitary Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night Any Any
DIET: Carnivore Carnivore Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10) Semi (2-4) Very (11-12)
TREASURE: Nil Nil Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral Neutral Chaotic neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1d4 1d4 1 (1d4)
ARMOR CLASS: 6 5 6
MOVEMENT: 12, F130(B, C if mounted) 9, Fl 18(A) 6, Fl 18(A)
HIT DICE: 5+5 1+1 2
THACO: 15 19 19
NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 3 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4 (x2)/1d10 1 (x2)/1d2 1d2 (x2)/1d4
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Rear claws 1d6+1 each Rear claws 1d2 each Nil
SPECIAL DEFENSES: —2 bonus on surprise rolls —2 bonus on surprise rolls Immune to poison
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil Nil 40%
SIZE: L (6’-7° long) T (1'-2' long) T (2' long, 3’ wingspan)
MORALE: Average (8-10) Average (8-10) Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 650 65 175
Greater Winged Cat Lesser Winged Cat

This creature is a large feline with wings covered in soft fur.
Most of them have short sandy-colored gray or black fur, but
yellow or gray specimens with black stripes exist. Lighter-col-
ored individuals usually have white underbellies and wings,
while the darker ones tend to have solid black fur. They nor-
mally have yellow or green eyes, with a few instances of blue.
A greater winged cat has a wingspan of 15 feet or more.

These cats speak their own language, and a few (10%)
speak the languages of sphinxes or other catlike species.

Combat: Winged cats are generally peaceful, but very danger-
ous if hunting or if threatened. They attack from the air when
possible, first using teeth and front claws while flying past an
opponent. If prevented from flying away, or if they enter
melee, they may rake with their rear claws, provided both
front claws hit first. These animals back down only if their
lives are endangered. Even then, the cat remembers the inci-
dent and may hunt its enemy for years to exact revenge.

Habitat/Society: These beasts inhabit grasslands and hills,
usually making a nest by flattening a small grassy area.
Winged cats mate once per year, during which time the male
brings gifts of food to his chosen partner. A litter of 1d3 cubs is
raised by the mother, and they often stay with her for as long
as two years. Winged cats live up to 50 years.

Ecology: Greater winged cats prefer live prey, especially mam-
mals or birds. They scavenge only in times of great need, and
they almost never attack humans or other bipeds. They are
intelligent enough to generally leave domestic animals alone.

If captured young, a winged cat can be trained as a mount,
though much patience is needed because of its great indepen-
dence. Once loyalty is obtained, it is never lost. A winged cat
will accept only its trainer as a rider.

 

Also known as “fluttercats,” lesser winged cats look much like
common domestic cats, but they have wings covered in soft
fur. Coloration varies widely, and almost any standard color
or combination is possible. The rarest are medium brown,
with dark brown faces, ears, paws, wings, and tails. Long and
short hair are equally common. They have wingspans of about
4 feet.

Fluttercats are playful and curious, and they can be quite
beautiful. Those that live in cities, however, may become as
scruffy as any common alley cat.

Combat: Fluttercats fight if threatened, and a mother will fero-
ciously protect her offspring. They fly at an opponent, attack-
ing with claws and teeth. If both front paws hit, they rake with
rear claws for 1d2 points of additional damage.

Habitat/Society: Fluttercats lair in enclosed spaces several feet
above the ground. Flutterkittens are born in litters of 1d3 and
need care for about three months, as they learn to fly and hunt.
They have a life span of up to 20 years, slowing down as they
get older, and spending more and more time in warm places.

Ecology: Fluttercats help control vermin populations. They are
also great bird hunters, being able to follow their prey into the
air. If captured as kittens, they make good pets, selling for as
much as 50 gp. They are affectionate toward loving masters,
but all have a strong sense of independence. They are prized
as familiars, but a wizard must be very lucky to gain one.

Tressym

Tressym are beautiful, fluffy, winged cats. They vary in hue
and the lengths of their coats as much as normal (wingless)
cats do. Most of them resemble a short-haired gray, tabby, or
black cat, except they possess two batlike wings that rest at
Cat, Winged

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

their well-muscled shoulders.

Tressym wings have feathers. The leathery membranous
appendages are divided into arc-segments by hollow bones
rather like the elongated fingers of a bat, but the leathery
membrane is covered in feathers.

Combat: Tressym stalk and pounce on prey, scratching and
biting as do normal cats, but with the added ability of flight,
which makes them far more deadly to birds (and insects) of
all sorts. They do not, however, tend to attack nestlings or
despoil eggs. In battle they are cunning, scratching at the
eyes of opponents, for example, and learning the nature of
danger quickly—a tressym that sees a wand activated under-
stands the perils of sticks of wood held by humans for the
rest of its life.

In addition to having 120-foot infravision, tressym can
detect invisible objects and creatures up to 90 feet away. They
can detect poison too: Through scent, taste, or touch, they rec-
ognize substances that are deadly to intelligent species.
Tressym themselves seem to be immune to all known forms of
poison.

Habitat/Society: Tressym, both wild and domesticated, may
be found in any temperate area. Locals who are aware of them
often feed tressym and try to prevent the worst of their van-
dalism and aerial catfights. At the same time, they try to pre-
vent any large-scale or magically assisted trapping and
capturing of them. Those who have lived among these crea-
tures value tressym for their owl-like rodent control in the
fields. Most of the flying cats lair in nearby forests and hunt
the farm fields by both night and day, av oaaing local cats and
dogs rather than fighting or tormenting them

Ecology: These cute, mischievous little terrors are semiwild
and thought to be the result of some long-past wizard experi-

mentation. They are known to live 20 years or more if they do
not meet with misadventure and are free to take shelter from,
or fly away from, the worst winter weather. Tressym mate as
often as normal cats and do not pair bond for life. They some-
times mate with normal cats, with whom they are biologically
compatible, but only 10% of resulting young will be tressym;
the rest will be wingless. Tressym are quite intelligent and
have been known to form strong friendships with (and
hatreds for) creatures of other races such as humans and elves.
Tressym have even been known to sacrifice themselves for
those they love.

A few mages have sought these creatures as familiars, and
have done so successfully. As familiars, tressym combine the
sensory advantages of a cat and an owl, and they have addi-
tional benefits: They are intelligent enough to carry and
manipulate complex and delicate items (but only to a limited
extent—they don’t have opposable thumbs); they can observe
and report events diligently; they can concentrate on a task at
hand even when hormones or instincts provide strong distrac-
tions; and they can identify poisons for their masters—even
harmful, naturally occurring gasses. Note that tressym cannot
confer or transmit any of their immunities to poison to another
creature.

Tressym are not strong enough to serve as flying mounts,
even with a creature as light as a halfling. However, they
could slow a halfling’s fall to 2d4 damage in descents of 90 feet
or more. (They simply cannot lessen the falling damage suf-
fered by any larger or heavier creature.)

Tressym tend to get along with others of their kind when
they meet, but they rarely lair or hunt together. They also tend
to ignore bats, griffons, and the like, but are deadly foes of
stirges and manticores (against whom they will gather with
other tressym to fight). Some tressym enjoy pai dogs, but
usually not to the point where either animal might be truly
endangered.

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any subterranean
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Tribe
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)
TREASURE: D(K, Q)
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil
NO. APPEARING: 1d6x10
ARMOR CLASS: 6 (9)
MOVEMENT: 12, Wb 9
HIT DICE:

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK;: 1d6 (x3)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Web traps
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: S (4° tall)
MORALE: Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 120

Chitines are small humanoids who build with webbing in the
same way that humans employ stone or wood. This diminu-
tive race is noted for its four arms, which are jointed to allow
for movement in ways that human limbs could never move.
Their faces are human, although they have multifaceted eyes
and mandibles protruding from their mouths. Long, stringy
black hair falls in a tangle from their skulls and grows down
their backs like the mane of a horse.

The skin of chitines is gray and mottled, secreting a special
oil that negates the adhesive effects of their own spider web-
bing. Meanwhile, the palms of their hands and the soles of
their feet are covered in dozens of tiny hooks which allow
them to climb textured surfaces with no loss of speed.

Chitines wear clothing made from dried, processed silk;
bits of colored rocks, carved bones, and such are frequently
woven throughout. They always keep their hands and feet
uncovered. They carry tools in pouches woven into their
clothing.

Chitines speak the language of the drow and sometimes
know a few other subterranean languages.

Combat: Chitines typically rely upon traps and ambushes.
Frequently they build a normal-looking spider web with a
seemingly natural way around it, but the web is a false trap
and a pit, drop net, or similar trap is sprung when the alter-
nate route is taken.

Because the chitines are able to build with webbing, they
devise all sorts of nasty tricks. By sticking dust and rock chips
to a mat of webbing, they can make a very convincing natural
stone wall or floor. Also, by means of a process known only to
them, they can harden webbing into a bony material that is
slightly flexible, not sticky, and hard enough to slice or pene-
trate armor. With it they can weave spikes and edges into their
traps that inflict 1d6 points of damage per spike or edge.

Chitine warriors commonly carry javelins and wear a web-
bing armor that is equivalent to studded leather. They also

|

 

 

 

 

carry short swords for melee combat. Usually, they wield
weapons in three of their hands and a hardened web-shield in
the fourth. (Note that they are sensitive to sunlight and fight at
a—1 penalty to attack and damage rolls under those condi-
tions.)

Weapons and armor made from hardened webbing work
just like normal items made by humans. However, the items
deteriorate after several months if not treated with the oil
secreted by their skin. Hardened webbing is also susceptible
to fire: Two rounds of contact with flame ignites it, burning the
item away in 2d4 rounds. Body armor made of hardened web-
bing cannot exceed Armor Class 4.

Habitat/Society: Chitines are only found underground. Their
cavern villages are located in the center of a maze of trap-
laden webbing. The hard-web dwellings resemble domed
houses, complete with windows and decorative shapes adorn-
ing them. These homes can be located on any surface, includ-
ing the ceiling of a cave. Bridges of webbing cross the town,
providing easy pathways. Suspended in the center of the cav-
ern is often a heart-shaped temple devoted to the evil goddess
Lolth.

Chitines are cast-off experiments of the drow. They have
increased in numbers over the centuries, and even now plot to
overthrow the drow, They are devoted to the spider queen and
will do anything in her name. The priestesses of the chitines
are rumored to be of a different and more powerful race, more
akin to Lolth herself.

Ecology: A chitine can spin sticky spider webbing at the rate
of one foot per round. The webbing is spun from an orifice in
its stomach. Chitines eat anything that moves, sucking the flu-
ids from the victim and leaving the dried remains on the cav-
ern floor underneath their temple. Chitines are hunted by both
drow and driders.
Crypt Servant

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: — Tombs

FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary or staff
ACTIVITY CYCLE: —~ Any

DIET: None
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: See below
ALIGNMENT: Lawful neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1d20 (see below)
ARMOR CLASS: 5

MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 6

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4 (x2) or by weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: None

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Special immunities, immune to

piercing weapons

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: M (4°-7’' tall)
MORALE: Fearless (20)
XP VALUE: 650

Crypt servants are corpses, usually desiccated, that are nor-
mally human, though elves, dwarves, and other races are not
unknown. They generally dress in the livery of their master,
the person buried in the tomb they serve.

Crypt servants speak the language of their master in dry,
slithery voices.

Combat: Though created to serve their master in all ways after
death, crypt servants are usually encountered defending their
master’s tomb and possessions from desecration. A solitary
crypt servant, or the crypt servant nearest the tomb’s entrance,
acts as a guard. Intruders are challenged verbally by the
guard; most require a certain verbal command or a visible sign
of the family of their master. Intruders who do not respond
properly are attacked.

Intruders who make it past a guardian crypt servant will
not be challenged by other crypt servants unless they disturb
the master’s possessions. Anyone who disturbs the body of
the master is attacked regardless of any commands or signs
they offer to deter the crypt servants. Crypt servants who
engage in combat call to other crypt servants in the tomb.
Despite the quiet nature of the creature’s voice, all the crypt
servants in a tomb respond in 1d6 rounds.

Many crypt servants are provided with weapons of some
sort; they attack with their fists if they are not. They press with
a mindless fury, concentrating on the last person to cause a
disturbance to their master or their master’s possessions.

Like other undead, crypt servants are immune to charm,
hold, and sleep spells.

Habitat/Society: Though it is possible to create a crypt servant
from any dead body, volunteers are preferred. Many ancient
crypt servants actually asked for their posts, wishing to serve
their masters in death as they did in life.

Crypt servants care for their deceased masters and all the

 

 

 

 

 

rooms and possessions in the tomb, Small tombs have only
one crypt servant, while grand tombs of wealthy and pow-
erful individuals may have several. Crypt servants clean
and repair the tombs, polish valuables, light candles, and
guard the tomb from intruders. At first they are fervent in
their need to serve, but as the years—and centuries—pass,
they take longer breaks between activity, sometimes stand-
ing motionless for days or even years before becoming
active again.

Because of their similar purpose and method of creation,
crypt servants are sometimes associated with crypt things (see
the MONSTROUS MANUAL tome). The spells to create each are
similar, and they probably have the same roots. If the crypt
thing is available for the DM’s campaign, one may be found as
the leader of a group of crypt servants.

 

Ecology: A crypt servant has no proper ecological niche. It nei-
ther adds to nor detracts from its environment, except to occa-
sionally eliminate intruders and vermin.

Create Crypt Servant (Necromancy)
7th-level wizard or priest spell
Range: Touch

Components: V,5

Duration: Permanent

Casting Time: 1 turn
Area of Effect: 1 corpse
Saving Throw: None

This spell animates a corpse as a crypt servant. The corpse
must be in reasonably good condition, and many are prepared
in advance of their master’s death. The spell must be cast in
the tomb in which the creature is to serve. A successful dispel
magic ends the crypt servant's animation, and the reverse of
the create crypt thing spell (see the MONSTROUS MANUAL tome),
destroy crypt thing, will also annihilate a crypt servant if it fails
a saving throw vs. death magic.
 

Dog, Saluqi

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any arid land
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Pack
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night
DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Semi (2-4)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 3d4
ARMOR CLASS: 7
MOVEMENT: 18

HIT DICE: 2

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

 

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d8
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Overbearing
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: S (3° tall)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE:

Saluqi are the greyhounds of the desert, known for their hunt-
ing skills, favored by the jann. They are sleek black animals
with gray markings, thin whiplike bodies, and long narrow
heads. Their pedigrees are rigorously maintained, allowing
owners to breed only from the finest stock.

Combat: These nocturnal desert hounds hunt by sight rather
than by smell, and they prefer to stay in packs rather than
hunt alone or in scattered lines. Their blurring-fast speed
allows saluqi a -2 modifier to their initiative rolls. The hounds
have infravision to a 120-foot range, and they can faultlessly
track quarry by its heat trail if it has passed over ground
within the past three turns.

Saluqi hounds are also known for their ability to bring
down opponents by attacking en masse. This overbearing
attack is resolved by a single attack roll against AC 10, allow-
ing only modifiers for Dexterity and magical pluses of armor
or other protective devices. There must be a minimum of four
hounds for the overbearing attack, and each hound over four
gives the pack an additional +1 attack modifier. If successful,
the hounds knock their opponent to the ground, and unless a
saving throw vs. petrification is successful, the opponent is
stunned and cannot take any action that round. To rise, a vic-
tim must spend a full round doing nothing but regaining his
footing in the midst of the pack. All attempts at spellcasting
are ruined by the pack, regardless of whether the overbearing
attack succeeds.

After the initial overbearing attack, such a victim is
attacked by individual members of the pack with +4 modifiers
to the hounds’ attack rolls and no Dexterity adjustment for the
victim’s AC. Some packs have also been trained to hold down

 

 

 

 

 

their foes; this requires that two dogs score successful hits on
their downed opponent. If the dogs succeed, the victim still
must spend a full round to stand up, but he must also make a
successful Strength check with a —-1 penalty for each dog that
hits. Failure indicates the victim was dragged back down.

Habitat/Society: Saluqi are a carefully bred strain of hounds,
and they are almost always found in the care of a huntsman
who has trained them from birth. They respond to a number
of standardized calls: “Attack, guard, return, pursue and
return, fetch, stay,” and “hold” are among the most common.

Saluqi do not flourish if they spend too much time in the
sun; nomads keep them in tents during the hottest part of the
day. Wild packs usually live near some cave or overhanging
shelter, where they can retreat from the burning sun.

Ecology: Saluqi greyhounds hunt small game and are good at
flushing antelope or other grazing animals from cover. Wild
packs of saluqi do exist, but they are extremely rare, as the
jann hunt these mutts and neuter them, then give them as gifts
to other desert tribesmen.

Jungle Hound

It is said that a related breed of hound has been created by jun-
gle dwellers. These hounds use similar tactics, but are much
better at tracking by smell than by sight—so much so that they
can follow a trail up to a week old. They are smaller than the
saluqi hounds, with orange and yellow patches of fur dap-
pling their dark coats instead of gray.
Dragon, Fang (Draco Dentus Terribilus)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Mountains or barrens
FREQUENCY: .. Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average to very (8-12)
TREASURE: In lair only; see below
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 1 (base)
MOVEMENT: 12, Fl 22(D), Jp 9

HIT DICE: 11 (base)

THACO: 9 (base)

NO. OF ATTACKS: 4
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2d4 (x2)/2d8/3d6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below

SIZE: G (36° base)
MORALE: Fanatic (17 base)
XP VALUE: See below

Fang dragons are greedy, rapacious, and cunning creatures.
Their bodies are armored with bony plates that rise into pro-
jecting spurs at limb joints and end in long, forked tails tipped
with a pair of scythelike bone blades. They fly poorly, but can
rise with a single clap of their wings to lunge forward. Their
body plates are a mottled gray and brown, their wings are
small but muscled, and their eyes tend to be glittering red or
orange (other hues are known). Fang dragons’ heads are
adorned with many small horns or spikes.

Combat: These dragons have poor magical ability, but they
have mastered physical combat. They rake with their claws
and slash with their tails for damage, and have an 80% chance
to knock down a medium- or smaller-sized victim. Those
knocked aside must make a successful Strength check to avoid
falling (saving throws for fragile carried items apply) and a
successful Constitution check to avoid being stunned for the
following round. Also, the victim of any successful claw attack
must make a successful Dexterity check to avoid suffering 1d4
additional damage from the dragon’s body spurs. These
attacks are used to clear aside incidental foes and/or pin the
main intended victim, whom the dragon then bites.

Fang dragons have excellent vocal control and are able to
mimic human voices very effectively as well as use spell
scrolls and verbally triggered magical items crafted by
humans. They have four small, feeble underclaws that can

carry treasure or wield rings, wands, rods, or weapons of dag-
ger size or smaller. They can even perform spellcasting ges-
tures.

Special Abilities: A fang dragon has no breath weapon, but
its bite permanently drains hit points if the victim fails to save
vs. breath weapon; drained hit points are gained by the dragon.
(If the dragon is slain within two rounds per experience level
of the drained victim, and the victim ingests or comes into
skin contact with some of the dragon's gore or cranial fluids,

 

 

 

 

 

the stolen hit points are regained.) This dragon casts spells and
uses magic at a level equal to 8 plus its combat modifier.

At birth, fang dragons can detect magic and read magic. They
also save vs. all spells cast specifically at them with a +1
bonus. As they age, they gain the following additional pow-
ers: young—sield twice per day; juvenile—dispel magic once
per day; adult—spell turning once per day; old—telekinesis
twice per day; wyrm—regenerate (self only) 1 hp per four
rounds.

 

Habitat/Society: Fang dragons prefer to seek food far from
their lairs, which they typically wall up with huge boulders to
keep out intruders in their absence. They speak snippets of
many languages and will bargain to avoid hopeless or hard
battles. They never attack others of their own kind, and they
mate once every 60 years or so, parting after a single night.

Ecology: Fang dragons eat all manner of fresh meat, especially
enjoying the flesh of intelligent mammals. Their fangs (pow-
dered) and their cranial fluids are valued in the making of
swords +2, nine lives stealer and similar magical items. Red and
fang dragons have an instinctive dislike for each other.

Body Tail Bite Spells XP
Age Lgl. Lgt. AC Drainthp) WorP MR Treasure Value
| Jty 3h + 2d4+1 Nil Nil Nil L400
2 6-12 612 3 4d4+2 Nil Nil Nil 2,000
3 12-20 12-22 2 od4+3 Nil Nil Nil 3,000
4 20-32 22-36 l sd4+4 Nil 10% R 5,000
> 32-38 36-40 0 1Od4+5 l 15% RS 7,000
6 B42 4H -! l2d4+6 1/1 21% R5,1 8,000
7 2-46 H4s -2 l4d4+7 2/1 25% QO.R5,1 9,000
8 46-56 48-42 -3 lod4+8 2/2/1 30%  Q,BS,T,U 11,000
9 56-62 62-58 4 [$d4+4 2f2/2 3550 A,B,S, 1,2 12,00)
10 62-66 65-72 5 2hd4+10 2f/2/2/1 40°. ABV x67 13,000
Il 66-68 72-76 -h D2d4+ll 2/2/2/2 SM |= A.BX2VXS,.2Z 15,000
12 68-72 7680 -7 Md4+12 2/2/2/2/1 70% A,BX4,VX9,Z 16,000
Dragon, Electrum

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: =‘ Mountains or barrens
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE; Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (15-16)
TREASURE: See below
ALIGNMENT: Neutral good
NO. APPEARING: l

ARMOR CLASS: 2 (base)
MOVEMENT: 12, Fl 24(C), Jp 2
HIT DICE: 9 (base)

THACO: 11 (base)

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 plus special
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4(x2)/3d8
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below

SIZE: G (36° base)
MORALE: Fearless (19 base)
XP VALUE: See below

Electrum dragons are peaceful and philosophical in nature,
but become deadly, alert, and deliberate fighters when
aroused. They dwell alone in lairs of stone (abandoned build-
ings, mountains, caverns), but they often welcome visitors
because they enjoy trading, bargaining, and philosophical
debate. They hoard things of beauty rather than monetary
wealth.

Combat: In battle, electrum dragons prefer to use their spells
and breath weapon from a distance. They are wise generals,
anticipating the strategies of foes. In melee they typically
attack with two foreclaws and a bite. They can pounce from
aloft to strike with all four claws, but they prefer to swoop and
slash with their foreclaws as they pass, dragging their
hindquarters and tail to buffet a foe for 2d6 points of battering
damage.

An electrum dragon's breath weapon is a cone of unique
gas, 40 feet long by 30 feet in diameter (5 feet across at the
dragon’s mouth). it causes enfeeblement (as the spell ray of
enfeeblement for one turn and/or confusion (as the spell) for
nine rounds (all victims save twice—once to avoid each effect).

An electrum dragon casts spells and uses magical abilities
at a level equal to 10 plus its age category value. At birth they
can detect magic and read magic. They also save vs. all spells
cast specifically at them with a +1 bonus to the roll. As they
age, they gain the following additional powers: young—iden-
tify by touch (no debilitating effects) at will; juvenile—locate
object once per day; adult—dispel magic three times per day;
old—telekinesis twice per day; wyrm—project image once per
day; and great wyrm—/al (self or another, by touch) once per
day.

Habitat/Society: Electrum dragons spend much time in
thought, often perched on mountain peaks, as immobile as
statues. They are curious and like to watch unnoticed the

_

 

 

 

 

 

activities of creatures that dwell around them. Much of their
time is spent seeking out things of beauty or practicing magic
(for they find beauty in the use of magic itself).

Electrum dragons mate about once per century, parting
after a short time (typically spent trading spells and playfully
darting and rolling about the sky together). A year after mat-
ing, the female produces 1d4 rubbery, foot-long eggs. She
leaves them untended; the eggs are fertile 75% of the time and
hatch 2d12 days after they are laid.

Ecology: Electrum dragons eat lichens, scrub bushes, and
graze treetops for tender young leaves. They also eat all man-
ner of fish, fowl, and meat, especially enjoying the flesh of
wyverns and griffons.

Some electrums have invented new spells and have sold or
given them to humans and elves. In some places, electrum
dragons are worshiped by primitive tribes or respected as
sages.

Body Tail Spells xP
Age Lgl. Lgt. AC W or P MR Treasure Value
1 M 3-6 5 Nil Nil Nil 2,000
2 6&2 12 4 Nil Nil Nil 3,000
3 1220 12-2 3 Nil Nil Nil 4,000
4 20-32 22-35 2 | 10% Q 7,000
5 32-35 3642 1 1/1 15% U 8,000
6 34 4248 0 2/1/1 20% QU 11,000
7 64450 48-56 -l 2/2/2 25% Qx2,U22 12,000
8 S56 56-62 -2 3/2/2/1 30% Qv3,Ux4 13,000
9 S662 62-68 -3 3/3/2/2 35% L,Qx3,Ux6,S 14,000
10 62-66 6872 + a/3/3/2/1 40% LQX4,UX7,5,V 15,000
Tl 668 72-76 -S 3/3/3/2/2/1 50% Lv2,QX4,Ux85,V 16,000
12 68-72 780) 6 0 (3/3/3/3/2/2/1 70% bdO5.U95,V 17,00
Dragon, Linnorm, Corpse Tearer

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any land

FREQUENCY: ~ Unique

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Special

INTELLIGENCE: Genius

TREASURE: Ax3, Bx3, C, Hx3, I
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: —10

MOVEMENT: 24 Fl 39(C), Sw 18, Br 18, Jp 18
HIT DICE: 28 (170 hp)

THACO: =

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 plus special
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 3d 12 (x2) /4d10/special
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spells, level drain, breath weapons
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Spells, +1 weapon to hit

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 50%

SIZE: G (330° long)
MORALE: Fearless (19)
XP VALUE: 35,000

Corpse Tearer is the most hideous of the Norse dragons, and
the most feared. This mottled-brown dragon lacks rear legs,
but has long front ones that end in broken yet deadly claws. Its
slime-covered scales are small and weathered; when at rest, it
looks like a fallen, dead tree. The linnorm’s head is ringed
with matted brown and gray hair, and tufts of the hair appear
at random intervals over its body, in places so matted that it
resembles loose, rotting flesh. Despite its deathly appearance,
Corpse Tearer is very much alive, moving and striking quickly.
This ancient creature has traveled greatly and is fluent in
nearly all human and demihuman tongues. It also is able to con-
verse with all linnorms and many evil, intelligent monsters.

Combat: Corpse Tearer enjoys combat, but isn’t overly eager
to fight. It watches foes carefully from a distance, noting their
abilities and potential weaknesses, then enters combat by fly-
ing above and employing its paralyzing breath weapon, fol-
lowed by its disease breath and spell-like abilities. If its
adversaries survive the first onslaught, Corpse Tearer lands on
the strongest ones, crushing them, and then fights with its
energy-draining claws and powerful bite. Each successful
claw attack drains one life level automatically from its victim.

If Corpse Tearer suffers more than 100 points of damage, it
flies away if possible or uses its dimension door ability to
escape.

Breath Weapon/Special Abilities: Corpse Tearer’s paralyzing
breath weapon is a cone 10 feet wide at the mouth, 300 feet
long, and 50 feet wide at its apex. Gassed creatures with less
than 4 HD are automatically paralyzed for 4d4 turns, but those
with more than 4 HD are allowed a saving throw vs. breath
weapon to avoid the effects. The disease breath is a cloud 100
feet long, 80 feet wide, and 80 feet thick, inflicting 8d12 + 12
points of damage (save for half damage allowed). Further-
more, victims are subjected to a magical disease that manifests

 

 

 

 

 

within 1d6 rounds, cutting a victim’s Strength score in half.
Then, every three turns, the Strength score is halved again,
until the creature's Strength drops to 1. A cure disease spell
stops the strength loss, but a wish or limited wish is needed to
restore lost Strength points. Corpse Tearer can breathe twice,
then requires two rounds before it can breathe again (no limit
otherwise).

This linnorm has the following abilities, useable at will:
continual darkness 100° radius, feign death, fly, polymorph self,
speak with dead, and water breathing. It is able to use the follow-
ing, once per day, at will: animate dead, control undead, delude,
dimension door, enervation, protection from good, spectral hand,
vampiric touch, and wraithform. Corpse Tearer uses all magical
abilities at 15th level.

Habitat/Society: Corpse Tearer’s lair is a vast chamber
beneath an ancient burial cave, guarded by a pair of controlled
vampires, the corpses of dead linnorms, and other undead.
This lair is almost impossible to find, and the few who have
found their way there are now helping to guard it. The cavern
is dank, stinks of rotting flesh, and is filled with Corpse
Tearer’s considerable wealth—the linnorm is obsessed with
garnering gems, magic, art objects, and coins, and it uses ani-
mated corpses to dig through graves and obtain more. Further,
it raids communities and ships to gain treasure.

Corpse Tearer claims only its sepulcher lair as territory,
willingly leaving the surface to other linnorms. Because it
spends an extraordinary amount of time cataloguing its
wealth, it rarely leaves its home.

Ecology: Corpse Tearer does not need sustenance in its lair.
Outside, it can eat virtually anything, although it prefers rot-
ting carcasses. This linnorm has no known predators, as those
who hate it are wise enough to avoid it.
 

Dragon, Linnorm, Dread

 

 

a,

Any land

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN:

FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Special
INTELLIGENCE: High (13-14)
TREASURE: See below
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: —4 (base)
MOVEMENT: 18, Sw 12

HIT DICE: 20 (base)

THACO: 1 (base)

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 plus special
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 5d10 (x2)/6d10/special
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spells, breath weapons
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Spells, +1 weapon to hit
MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below

SIZE: G (68° base length)
MORALE: Fanatic (17-18)

XP VALUE: See below

Dread linnorms, the only known two-headed Norse dragons,
have an ability to wreak havoc on human settlements that is
legendary. When they hatch, their small, glossy scales are
black. As they age, the scales become duller and larger, shift-
ing from black to gray at the linnorms’ whim.

Dread linnorms speak their own tongue and communicate
only with other Norse dragons.

Combat: Dread linnorms attack first with spells, then with
their twin breath weapons, the left head breathing one round
before the right (the heads alternate their attacks every round
thereafter, until each head has breathed three times). Survivors
are then attacked with further spells before the dragon slithers
closer and uses its twin bites and tail slap. Some dreads may
simply continue their assault from the air, using a fly spell.

Breath Weapon/Special Abilities: The right head of a dread
breathes a magical cone of chilling wind that is 3 feet wide at
the mouth, 120 feet long, and 60 feet wide at its terminus; this
breath knocks victims back 2 feet per point of damage suf-
fered. The left head of the dread breathes a cloud of hot dust
80 feet long, 50 feet wide, and 30 feet high. Creatures caught in
either breath may attempt a saving throw for half damage.

Dreads are immune to all enchantment/charm spells, In
addition, they gain the following abilities as they age: juve-
nile—telekinesis once per round; adult—move earth four times
per day; old—power word, stun three times per day; venera-
ble—energy drain (must make a successful bite attack); great
wyrm—antipathy-sympathy twice per day. They also cast wiz-
ard spells. All spells and magical abilities are used at a level
equal to § plus the linnorm’s combat modifier.

Habitat/Society: Dread linnorms live in desolate places, pre-
ferring deep, twisting caverns in which they set traps to con-
fuse and kill trespassers. They share their lairs only when
mating, once every 40-50 years. The parents remain together

 

 

 

 

 

until the eggs hatch, then go their separate ways, leaving the
hatchlings to fend for themselves.

These rarest of linnorms inhabit any clime. They respect
other linnorms and stay clear of their territories, but have no
qualms about laying waste to human communities and mak-
ing their lairs in the ravaged countryside.

While dreads accumulate vast wealth over the course of
their long lives, they do not covet treasure and magic as do
other dragons. To them, such things are merely incidental
spoils they never bother to inventory; they keep treasure only
out of instinct. Such riches are usually scattered throughout
their lairs, in various mounds upon which they sometimes lie.
Slaves and prisoners are never taken.

Ecology: Dreads seem to require little sustenance, but they
enjoy wood seasoned by salt water and will attack ships to
acquire that treat. Dreads at the juvenile stage and older have
no known predators except perhaps brave giant bands. How-
ever, hatchlings and young are stalked by giants for food and
trophies, and they are sometimes tracked by heroes.

Body Tail Breath Wizard Treasure XP
Age Let. Lgt. AC Weapon Spells MR Type Value
1 3-24 3-24 =| 2d8+1 1 40% HHS 13,000
2 25-42 25-42 -2 4d8+2 2 45% HS = 14,000
3 43-57 43-57 -3 6d8+3 3 50% HS = 15,000
4 58-76 58-76 -4 Sd B+4 3/1 55% HS = 17,000
5 77-96 77-96 5 10d8+5 3/2/11 60% HSx2 18,000
6 97-107 9-107 + 12d8+6 4/3/2 65% HS 2 20,000
7 108-129 108-129 _-+7 14d8+7 5/3/3/1 70% $HSx2 21000
8 130-156 130-156 -# 16d8+8 §/4/3/2 75% HSS 23,000
9 157-186 157-186 9-9 18d8+9 6/4/4/3 80% H.Sx3 24,000
10 187-217 «187-217 -10) «=20d8+10) = 6 /4/4/4/1 85%  H,Sx3 26,000
1 218-237) =. 218-237) = -11 «= dB) 0S 7/5/4/4/2 90% HS 27,000
120 «6238-265 «= 238-265-112 24dB+1200—7/5/5/4/3 95% HSx4 28,000
Dragon, Linnorm, Flame

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any land

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Special

INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (15-16)
ont

TREASURE: See below

ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: —4 (base)

MOVEMENT: 24, Fl 39(B)

HIT DICE: 20 (base)

THACO: 1 (base)

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 plus special

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 3d6 (x2)/3d10

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spells, breath weapon

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below

SIZE: G (40° base length)
MORALE: Fanatic (17-18)
XP VALUE: See below

Flame linnorms, the most beautiful of the Norse dragons and
perhaps the most rare, live to bend others to their will and to
accumulate wealth.

The scales of a hatchling are black, but they fade to a soft,
dull gray by the juvenile stage (when the flame is often con-
fused with gray linnorms.) The scales become vibrant, glow-
ing orange in the young adult, and pure scarlet in the wyrm.
Adult and older linnorms appear as masses of fire when they
walk, and great wyrms are said to look like fireballs.

Flames speak their own language and can communicate
with all other Norse dragons. Very young linnorms have a
20% chance to pick up human tongues, and the percentage
chance increases 10% per age category.

Combat: In combat a flame linnorm prefers to attack from
above, almost always striking first with spells, hoping to take
down its targets without damaging any valuables. It continues
if necessary with its breath weapons and magical fire abilities,
fighting with claws and bite only if it has no other choice.

Breath Weapon/Special Abilities: A flame linnorm has two
breath weapons, inflicting equal damage. One is a cloud of hot
ashes 90 feet long, 70 feet wide, and 40 feet deep. The other is a
5-foot-wide, 110-foot-long stream of flame. The linnorm
wields magic abilities at 9th level plus its combat modifier.

All flames are immune to nonmagical fire. As they age,
they gain other abilities: very young—immunity to magical
fire, plus heat metal (three times per day); juvenile— pyrotech-
nics and produce fire (each three times per day); adult— fireball
(every three rounds); old—fire charm and fire trap (each three
times per day); venerable—flame strike and wall of fire (each
twice per day); great wyrm—fire seeds and firestorm (each once
per day).

Habitat/Society: Flame linnorms attack nonintelligent crea-
tures only for food. They are loners, making their homes in

 

 

 

 

 

deep caverns that accommodate their huge forms and even
larger piles of treasure. They don’t hate other linnorms, but
they choose to isolate themselves, not wanting to risk the theft
of their cherished wealth. They regularly inventory their
hoard, and magical treasures are especially prized—they
spend long hours trying to discover what those items do.
Flame linnorms use their magical items in battle or to enslave
humans and demihumans, who help the linnorm acquire yet
more treasure. Flames memorize every inch of their territory
and guard it zealously. Also, there’s a 25% chance for a flame
linnorm of venerable or greater age to have 1d4 fire elementals
guarding its lair. Sages are uncertain whether the elementals
are summoned by magic or whether they willingly serve the
linnorm in exchange for treasure.

Flame linnorms mate every 30 years, then separate. The
female is left to lay eggs on her own, and she abandons the
young as soon as they hatch.

Ecology: Flame linnorms eat herd animals, trees, and the very
earth. However, their favorite food is any object on fire. These
creatures sometimes set sections of forest ablaze just to dine.

Body Tail Breath Wizard Treasure XP
Age = Lg. Let. AC Weapon Spells MR Type Value
l 3-24 3-34 -] 2d8+1 | 40% AE 14,000
2 25-42 25-42 2 4d6+2 2 45% E 18,000
3-43-57 43-57 -3 6d8+3 3 3% E.G 21,000
4 58-76 58-76 4 Sdb+4 3/1 500 E,G 23,000)
5 77-96 77—Yb 5 = 10d8+5 3/2/'1 60% E,G,H 24,000
6 97-107 97-107 -4 12d8+6 4/3/2 65% E,G,H,I 25,000
7 108-129 108-129 -7 144847 5/3/3/1 70% E,G,H x2 26,000
8 13-156 130-156 -8 16d8+8 5/4/3/2 foto = E,G.H,k2 27,000
9 157-186 157-186 -9 18d8+9 6/4/4/3 80% E,G,HIx2 28,000
1) 87-217) 1874-217) -10)  20d8+10) «= 6/4/4/4/1 85% E,GH,b3 29,000
1] 218-237) 218-237) =-1l)«22d84+11 «7 /5/4/4/2 90% EGH.b3 30,000
12. 238-265 238-265 -12 2d4d8+12  7/5/5/4/3 95% EG.H,bG 31,000
Dragon, Linnorm, Forest

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any nonarctic forest
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCEE— Any

DIET: Special
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: See below
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil

NO. APPEARING: l

ARMOR CLASS: 1 (base)
MOVEMENT: 24, Sw 12

HIT DICE: 11 (base)

THACO: 9 (base)

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 + special
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2d8 /special
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spells, breath weapon, surprise
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Spells

MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below

SIZE: H-G (21° base length)
MORALE: Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: See below

A forest linnorm resembles a huge, grotesque snake more than
a dragon. Its body is a mottled green and brown that masks its
form in forest undergrowth. This linnorm possesses a great
ego, a natural cunning, and unending cruelty. It considers no
creature above it and hates all beings possessing more than
animal intelligence, especially “beautiful” creatures.

At birth, a forest linnorm could be easily confused with a
large green lizard, as it has four legs and a thin, whiplike tail.
As the creature matures, its legs atrophy, disappearing by
young adulthood. Brown splotches appear on its body, its
scales become larger and thicker, and its head widens.

Forest linnorms speak the languages of all animals in addi-
tion to their own, but can’t converse with humans.

Combat: Forest linnorms trap prey by mimicking the sounds
of injured animals (imposing a +2 bonus upon surprise rolls),
and older specimens use illusions to further deceive. Their
prized targets are humans, as they find those people beautiful
and therefore objects to be injured, punished, and slain.
Forests use their breath weapons to weaken victims before
physically attacking. They tend to fight to the death, viewing
no opponent as too strong or dangerous.

Breath Weapon/Special Abilities: This breath weapon is a 1-
foot-wide gout of heavy, acidic liquid extending in a straight
line 6 feet per age category. The liquid inflicts damage and acts
as a wither spell upon a randomly selected limb (no save).

Forest linnorms cast spells and use their magical abilities at
a level of ability equal to 5 plus their combat modifier. They
are limited to learning only illusion/phantasm spells.

Forest linnorms are born with a constant invisibility to ani-
mals power. At the young stage they can warp wood, at young
adulthood they can cause plant growth, at mature adulthood
they can cause spike growth, at very old stage they can use
sticks to snakes, and wyrms can pass plant. Except for invisibility
to animals, each ability is usable three times per day.

L

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Forest linnorms jealously maintain a 100-
square-mile territory, tolerating others only when they mate.
When offspring are born, the male returns to its own territory,
and the mother forces the young to leave her territory when
they pass from the hatchling stage.

These monsters make their lairs in densely overgrown
forests, wrapping their bodies about trees and bushes, becom-
ing virtually undistinguishable from roots and trunks. They
prefer temperate weather, but can stand great extremes.

Forests usually store their treasure in hollow tree trunks.
They prize gems and jewelry, but only so they can break them
later. It’s rare to find intact objects in a forest linnorm’s cache,
although there is usually plenty of gold and silver.

Ecology: While forest linnorms are omnivorous, they prefer
the flesh of what they consider attractive creatures such as
stags, eagles, swans, humans, and demihumans. The lin-
norms’ natural enemies are giants, who hunt them for food
and their hides. Human heroes are also the bane of forest lin-
norms.

Body Tail Breath = Wizard Treasure XP
Age Lgt. Lgt. AC Weapon = Spells MR Type Value
I 1-4 t+-i4 4 Id4+1 Nil Nil Nil 1,400
2 5-10 15-24 3 2d4+2 Nil Nil Nil 2,000
3 11-18 BH Z 3d4+3 Nil Nil Nil 5,000
+ 19-26 41-36 I tid4-4 l 13% ZE 9,000
5 7-4 57-70 0 5d4+5 2 2% E 11,000
6 35-42 71-86 C= 6d4+6 3 25% E 14,000
? 43-50 87-100 -2 7d4+7 4 30% E 17,000
5 51-58 11-4 = =3 Ad4+8 4/) 35% Ex? 18,000
9 50-4 15-128 + od4+4 4/2 40% Ex? 19,000
10 65-72 129-152 <5 10d4+10 4/3 45° Ex? 21,000
1] 73-80 153-lip bh lid4+11 4/4 Bi) ExS 22,000
12 81-85 167-130 7 l2d4+120— 44/1 55% Ex3 23,000)
Dragon, Linnorm, Frost

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Arctic or subarctic land
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Family

ACTIVITY C¥Y€EE: Any

DIET: Special
INTELLIGENCE: Genius (17-18)
TREASURE: See below
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil

NO. APPEARING: 1d8

ARMOR CLASS: —4 (base)
MOVEMENT: 12, Sw 18

HIT DICE: 15 (base)

THACO: 5 (base)

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2 plus special
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 3d10/4d10/special
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spells, breath weapon
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Spells

MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below

SIZE: G (48° base length)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)

XP VALUE: See below

Frost linnorms are perhaps the most territorial of all Norse
dragons, never resting until all other intelligent creatures
within their domains are destroyed.

At birth, frosts appear to have fur, but small pearly scales
appear by the time they pass the hatchling stage. Eventually
the scales become thicker and sharp like jagged ice, ever shift-
ing in hue from white to pale blue to transparent, blending
with the environment. Frosts have small forelegs with manip-
ulative claws, though they are too weak for combat.

These creatures speak their own language and those of
other Norse dragons. Hatchlings have a 25% chance to magi-
cally communicate with any creature with an Intelligence of 2
or higher, and that chance increases by 15% per age category.

Combat: Frosts spend months plotting against enemies, play-
ing out battles in their minds until all strategies are worked
out. They like to attack in the winter and play upon victims’
weaknesses, always using breath weapons, runes (see the
Viking Campaign Sourcebook, TSR stock #9322), and magical
items and abilities before fighting with a bite and tail slap.
They often attempt to confront their foes on ice, as they never
lose their balance, timing, or orientation on slippery terrain.

Breath Weapon/Special Abilities: The frost’s breath weapon is
a cloud of ice particles 80 feet long, 60 feet wide, and 40 feet
high (save for half damage). They are immune to natural and
magical cold, and gain the following abilities as they age, each
usable at will, three times a day: young adult—audible glamer,
meld into ice; adult—phantasmal force, ice shape; mature adult
improved phantasmal force, control temperature 40° radius; old—
spectral force, transmute rock to ice; very old—heal;
venerable—advanced illusion, transport via ice; wyrm—transmute
wood to ice; great wyrm—programmed illusion, transmute metal to
ice. (Ice spells are variants of those found in the PHB.) All magic
is wielded at a level equal to 7 plus the dragon’s combat modi-
fier. They are always successful casting rune spells.

 

 

 

 

 

 

tat/Society: Frost linnorms are found in frigid climes, ranging
from the poles in winter months to devastate and plunder
human settlements. Older linnorms use their magical abilities
to transform their territories into ice and shape them into elab-
orate, reflective lairs.

Frosts are familial and keep their young close until they
reach adulthood. Offspring are frequently included in the
complex battle plans conceived by the eldest dragon. The
smaller the number of frost linnorms encountered, the older
they will tend to be; solitary frosts are always venerable or
older, their mates dead and their offspring long gone.

Frost linnorms bury treasure within their lairs, usually
beneath sheets of ice. They value gems, jewelry, coins, and
especially art. Some objects are considered so beautiful that
they place them about the lair where they can be admired.

Ecology: Frost linnorms require little sustenance and don’t eat
creatures they kill. Sages believe they gain nourishment from
inhaling frigid winds.

Body Tail Breath Rune Treasure XP
Age Lgt. Let. AC Weapon Spells MR Type Value
] 1-12 3-12 -1 1d10+1 Nil 10% £ 6,000
2 13-23 13-21 -2 3d10+2 Nil 15% aa 8,000
3 2442 22-30 -3 5d10+3 Nil 20% 2G 9,000
4 43-61 31-49 4 7d10+4 1 25% 2X4 11,000
5 62-80 50-68 5 9d1045 1 30% 2x5 12,000
b 81-99 69-87 -6 11d10+6 2 35% ZX 13,000
7 100-118 88-106 -7 13d10+7 2 40% ZX7 14,000
8 119-137 107-125 -8 = «15d 10+8 3 45% ZX8 16,000
9 138-156 126-144 “4 17d104+9 3 50% 2x9 17,000
10 157-165 3145-153 -10 19d10+10 4 55% ZX10 18,000
ll 166-174 14-162 -ll 2idi0+il 4 60% Zl 19,000
12 175-183 «163-171 0-12) 23d10+12 5 65% 2*12 21,000
 

Dragon, Linnorm, Gray

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any land

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Special

INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)

TREASURE: See below

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: —1 (base)

MOVEMENT: 12, Fl 36(C), Sw 12

HIT DICE: 13 (base)

THACO: 7 (base)

NO. OF ATTACKS: 4 plus special

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 4d6 (x2)/4d10/2d6

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spells, poisonous tail, breath
weapon

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Spells

MAGIC RESISTANCE; See below

SIZE: H-G (18° base length)

MORALE: Fearless (19-20)

XP VALUE: See below

Gray linnorms are ruthless and revel in harming intelligent
creatures. They have the smallest bodies of all Norse dragons,
but have long, whiplike tails which they employ in combat.

At birth a gray linnorm has shiny black scales so small they
appear to be smooth skin. They grow larger and thicker until
the dragon reaches juvenile stage, when their color begins to
fade. By mature adulthood the scales are the color of lead. The
gray can make them appear shinier or duller by concentrating.

Gray linnorms speak their own language and can talk with
other Norse dragons. A hatchling has a 40% chance of being
able to speak with any other intelligent creature, and the

Eo;

chance to do so increases at a rate of 15% per age category.

Combat: A gray linnorm spends little time plotting attacks.
Further, it doesn’t attempt to kill from a distance; rather, the
gray relishes killing with its two foreclaws, its bite, and its
whiplike tail. An especially malicious gray captures victims
and toys with them before eventually finishing them. Grays
(adult and older) often use shape change to appear as different
types of linnorms, attempting to blame others for their attacks.

Breath Weapon/Special Abilities: The gray’s breath weapon
is a jet of black slime 3 feet wide and 60 feet long. It is a caustic
substance that corrodes metal in 3d4 rounds unless it’s
washed off; the metal is allowed a save vs. acid to avoid this
effect (magical bonuses apply). The tail of a gray oozes type B
poison: Those struck by it suffer 2d6 damage, plus 20 points
from the venom (unless they successfully save vs. poison).

Grays gain abilities as they age: very young—protection
from normal missiles (constant); juvenile—contagion (3/ day);
adult— shape change (at will, 3/day); old—wraithform (3/day);
venerable—distance distortion (3/day); great wyrm—sink
(2/day). Their spells come from the spheres of All, Charm,
Elemental, Protection, and Weather. A gray uses magic at a
level equal to 7 plus its combat modifier.

_

 

aay ea

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Gray linnorms are found on high places, con-
sidering their territory to be everything within line of sight.
Their lairs are tunnels into hillsides, the entrances of which are
carefully concealed and trapped.

Grays mate every 20-30 years. The parents stay with their
offspring until they reach the young stage, at which time the
parents separate, meeting again in 20-30 years. They are soli-
tary creatures, but they may join forces with other grays to
stage raids. They immediately attack any intelligent creature
encroaching upon their territories, fearing the creature might
be after their wealth, but they especially hate frost linnorms.
While grays collect almost anything (including cloth, furni-
ture, and ship gear), they are especially fond of coins of all

Ecology: Gray linnorms can digest nearly anything, but have a
taste for cattle and sheep, so they are a terror to farmers. They
have no natural predators, but they are sometimes hunted by
adventurers, who use their scales for armor and their poison
and other body parts in potions and spell components.

Body Tail Breath Priest Treasure XP
Age = Lgt. Let. AC Weapon Spells MR Type Value
1 1+ 4-10 2 4d4+1 1 10% Cc 7,000
2 5-9 11-2 1] 6d4+2 1/1 15% Cc 9,000
3 10-15 21-32 «(0 Bd4+3 1/1/1 20% CE 10,000
4 16-25 393-52 -1 I0d4+4 2/1/1 25% CE 11,000
5 2635 53-73 -2 l2d4+5 2/2/1 30%  C,Ex2 13,000
6 3647 7496 -3 = lddde6 2/2/2/1 35% CE2 15,000
7 48-59 97-121 -4 16d4+7 3/2/2/2 40%  CEFx2 16,000
8 672 12-150 -5 18d4+8 8 (3/3/2/2/1 45%  CE.Fx2 17,000
9 73-87 #151-178 -6 (20d4e9 | =3/3/3/2/1 50% CERG 18,000
10 «88-116 (179-235 -7 0 2d4+1003/3/3/3/2 55% GCERS 20,000
11) 17-136 «236-277 -§8 9 2ddd+1] 0 4/3/3/3/3 60% =6CE,Fx4 21,000
12 137-157 (278-325 -9 8626dd+12 4/4/3/3/3/1 65%  C,E.Fx4 22,000
Dragon, Linnorm, Land

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any nonarctic land
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (15-16)
TREASURE: See below
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: —1 (base)
MOVEMENT: 18, Sw 12, Br 12
HIT DICE: 13 (base)

THACO: 7 (base)

NO. OF ATTACKS: 4 plus special
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d10 (x2) /3d10/2d10/see below
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spells, breath weapon
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Spells

MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below

SIZE: G (48° base length)
MORALE: Fanatic (17-18)

XP VALUE: See below

Land linnorms are driven solely by greed, and they enjoy
twisting humans and the land to their own corrupt desires.

Land linnorms have four legs, and the forelimbs are useful
in combat. The scales of hatchlings are small, green, and glis-
ten like gems. As the linnorms age, their scales enlarge, lose
their luster, and begin to change at the individual’s whim,
from various shades of greens to browns to grays.

Lands speak their own language and those of Norse
dragons. Further, there is a 10% chance that a hatchling can
magically speak with all intelligent creatures, and that chance
increases 10% per age category.

Combat: Land linnorms are cautious, sizing up their intended
victims before engaging them in combat. They sometimes fol-
low a target for days, in human or animal form if the linnorm
is old enough to polymorph, studying the target’s strengths
and weaknesses before attacking. They usually begin an
assault with their breath and spells before closing to attack
with claws, a bite, and a tail slap. Lands use physical attacks
only if they're certain they can beat their victims, abandoning
targets that seem too dangerous.

Breath Weapon/Special Abilities: This dragon's breath
weapon is a blast of heat 120 feet long, 5 feet wide at the
mouth and 40 feet wide at its terminus; those caught within
the cone may attempt to save vs. breath weapon for half dam-
age. The searing heat instantly fatigues victims, even if the
save succeeds, and Strength scores are reduced by half (round
down). Land linnorms’ runes, selected at random from the
Viking Campaign Sourcebook (TSR stock #9322), are always cast
successfully.

Lands are born able to cast transmute rock to mud and its
reverse once per day each. They gain other powers as they age,
each usable three times per day: young—invisibility; young
adult—dig; mature adult—polymorph self; very old—stone shape;
wyrm—conjure earth elemental; great wyrm—earthquake.

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: These dragons prefer hilly terrain near
human settlements, where they can perch and note the pas-
sage of any wealth. They lair in caves; older linnorms use their
stone shape ability to fashion their own homes, complete with
traps.

Land linnorms join only to mate, separating after the off-
spring pass hatchling stage. However, some land linnorms
have been reported to join forces to attack adversaries too
strong for a single linnorm to face. Such alliances are brief,
ending after the division of the spoils.

Lands loathe humans and demihumans, for they are jeal-
ous of creatures who accumulate the treasure they love. How-
ever, a few of them have been known to capture humans with
magic skills, forcing the prisoners to instruct them or reveal
treasures. In rare cases a land dragon has formed a long-term
relationship with a “lesser being,” receiving magic training
and material wealth in exchange for the human's continued
life.

Ecology: Land linnorms can even eat stones, but they prefer
flesh. They have no natural enemies. Abandoned young are
often preyed upon by adventurers, giants, and other monsters.

Body Tail Breath Rune Treasure XP
Age Lgt. Let. AC Weapon Spells MR Type Value
I 1-12 3-12 2 1d12+1 Nil 10" Nil 8,000
2 13-25 13-21 l 3d12+2 l 15% A 12,000
3 2442 22-30 0 5d12+3 2 2a A 17,000
4 43-61 3149 ~] 7d12+4 3 25% A,B 15,000)
5 62-80 50-68 -2 9d12+5 4 30% A.B 19,000
6 §1-99 69-87 -3 lidi2+6 5 35% A,Bx2 21,000
a 100-118 =68-106 4 13d1247 6 tO A,BX2 22,000
8 118-137 = 107-125 = 15d12+8 7 45% A,BXS 33,000
9 138-156 126-14 -6 17d 1249 8 50% A.BX3 = 34,000
10) «157-165 145-153 -7)— 19d 12+10 9 55% A,BCx3- 25,000
1] 166-174 154-1620 8 Dd 10 60% A,B.CX3 = 28,000
[2 175-183) 163-171 9 23d12+12 1] 65% AB,CX3 = 31,000
 

Dragon, Linnorm, Midgard

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Deep ocean/any
FREQUENCY: Unique
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Special
INTELLIGENCE: Supra-genius (20)
TREASURE: S,T,U,V,W,X (all 5)
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: -12
MOVEMENT: 18, Sw 39

HIT DICE: 25 (200 hp)
THACO: 2

NO. OF ATTACKS: 4 plus special

 

DAMAGE/ATTACK:
SPECIAL ATTACKS:

3d10 (x2)/2d12/4d10/special
Spells, breath, constriction

 

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Spells, +2 weapon to hit
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 70%

SIZE: G (500° long)
MORALE: Fearless (19)

XP VALUE: 31,000

The Midgard linnorm may be the sole offspring of the Midgard
Serpent, child of Loki—sages believe (and hope) there is only
one. This great wingless serpent may be as immortal as its sire.

The linnorm’s body is covered with blue, green, and silver
scales that glisten like opals. Its head, filled with a double row
of pale-blue teeth, stretches 50 feet wide and twice that long.
Its emerald-green, lidless and pupil-less eyes are round and
mirror whatever looks into them, The head is topped with a
ridge of coarse, midnight blue hair that extends partway
down its massive neck, where it becomes a lighter-blue spinal
ruff that runs to the tip of the barbed tail. The creature's rear
legs are stumpy for its massive form, appearing too weak to
support it; its longer front legs end in razor-sharp claws.

The Midgard linnorm speaks the languages of all Norse
dragons and can telepathically communicate with all other
intelligent creatures as well.

Combat: Despite its malicious nature, the Midgard avoids bat-
tle, considering combat beneath it. It prefers to meddle in the
affairs of other creatures through its magic, keeping its dis-
tance yet maintaining control of the situation. The dragon
relies upon guards to fight for it, but if a threat menaces, it
uses its deadly breath and spells. The Midgard attacks with its
claws, bite, and tail slap only if necessary.

Breath Weapon/Special Abilities: The Midgard possesses
three breath weapons. The first is a spray of boiling water 10
feet wide and 200 feet long. Struck creatures with fewer than 4
HD drown unless they can breathe water; creatures of 5-7 HD
drown if they fail to save (those with more than 7 HD aren't
subject to drowning). Al! victims suffer 20d20 + 12 points of
damage (save for half) and are thrust back 100 feet. The second
breath weapon is a cloud of dust 200 feet long, 80 feet wide,
and 60 feet deep that inflicts 16d20 + 12 damage (save for half).
Those who fail to save are affected as if subjected to dust of

 

 

 

 

 

 

sneezing and choking. The third breath weapon is a cone of
wind 20 feet wide at the mouth, 200 feet long, and 50 feet wide
at the base, inflicting 12d20 + 12 damage (save for half) and
pushing victims back 200 feet. The dragon can breathe every
other round, as often as it likes. Victims of any breath attack
save with a -3 penalty due to this creature’s power.

This dragon can constrict creatures with its tail, inflicting 20
points of damage per round; a successful bend bars roll at
half-normal chance is needed to wriggle free. The linnorm has
the following abilities, useable at will: create water, ESP, protec-
tion from fire, telepathy, and water breathing. It can perform at
will, once per day: airy water, charm person, charm monster, death
fog, detect invisibility, hypnotic pattern, improved invisibility,
power word blind, power word stun, raise water, shape change, solid
fog, telekinesis, teleport without error, veil, wall of fog, whispering
wind, wizard eye. It uses magic at 14th level.

Habitat/Society: The Midgard lives at the bottom of the ocean,
considering the company of others inconsequential. Its lair is a
huge, dark underwater sea cave guarded by four venerable
sea linnorms (q.v.) with maximum hit points. The creature
stores its wealth within the deepest chambers. Discarding
coins and gems, the dragon primarily keeps magical treasure,
which it wields when venturing out of its lair. Also in the lair
are remnants of visits to the surface: prows of ships, statues
from villages, large shields, and other trinkets.

This dragon considers the sea floor its domain and is quick
to dispatch any creature that claims territory in its presence.

Ecology: The Midgard requires little sustenance, dining once
every 40 or 50 years upon vast amounts of sea foam—and any-
thing floating on it. It has no known predators, but many ene-
mies in human and demihuman communities. All other
linnorms bow to the Midgard.
Dragon, Linnorm, Rain

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any land
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Special
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: See below
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 3 (base)
MOVEMENT: 18, Fl 39(B), Sw 9
HIT DICE: 10 (base)
THACO: 11 (base)

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 plus special

 

 

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d12 (x2)/3d10/see below
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spells, breath weapon
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below

SIZE: H—G (20° base length)
MORALE: Fanatic (17-18)

XP VALUE: See below

Rain linnorms are quite vain, to the point of demanding
credit for their atrocities. The more heinous the act, the more
powerful the rain linnorm feels. Rain linnorms desire more
treasure than other dragons could possibly accumulate.

Hatchling rain linnorms’ teardrop-shaped scales are shiny
and white. As they age, the scales grow larger and thicker, and
turn gray, blue, green, or white at the creature’s whim.

Rains speak their own language and can communicate with
other Norse dragons, though they rarely lower themselves to
do so. A hatchling has a 5% chance to communicate with all
other animals, and that chance increases 5% per age category.

Combat: Young and juvenile rains are quick to rush into battle
for treasure, attacking first with breath weapons and magical
abilities. (A favorite stratagem of juveniles is to call lightning.)
However, if a target appears nonthreatening, the linnorm
fights with claws and bite, hoping to leave valuables intact.
Adult and older ones hate to sully their claws, so they always
attack first with spells, then assault their targets with breath
weapons.

Breath Weapon/Special Abilities: The rain linnorm’s breath is
a stream of boiling water 3 feet wide and 90 feet long (saving
throw for half damage applies). A rain linnorm casts spells at a
level equal to 8 plus the dragon’s combat modifier.

Rains are born invulnerable to electrical attack, and they
gain abilities as they age: very young—create food and water
(twice per day); young—plant growth and entangle (three times
per day each); juvenile—call lightning (twice per day); young
adult—lightning bolt (twice per day) and water breathing (at
will); adult—control winds (twice per day); mature adult—
moonbeam and rainbow (each three times per day); old—
immune to missile weapons, and fransmute dust to water (three
times per day); very old—immune to nonmagical blunt
weapons, and weather summoning (twice per day); venerable—
immune to nonmagical edged weapons, and conjure water ele-

 

 

 

 

wyrm—regenerate 10 hp/round and control weather (once per
day); great wyrm—regenerate 20 hp/round and wind walk
(once per day).

Habitat/Society: Rain linnorms live on hills, where they can
be comfortably buffeted by wind and rain. Their lairs within
the hills have treasure hidden inside many chambers. A rain
stays in its lair only when the weather is pleasant. Wyrms and
great wyrms have been known to control the weather when
the land has been too long without inclement weather.

Rain linnorms consider all others beneath them, and there-
fore improper company. Indeed, the only time more than one
is encountered is when a pair has mated—they separate when
the eggs hatch, abandoning the young.

Rains attempt to kill all intelligent creatures that come too
near their lairs. If one believes the location of its lair is known,
it will painstakingly move its treasure to a new lair.

Ecology: Rain linnorms subsist on almost anything, but their
favorite food is lightning bolts. They have no known predators
except adventurers.

Body Tail Breath Wizard Treasure XP
Age Let. Lgt. AC Weapon Spells MR Type Value
1 i4 1-8 6 3d6+1 Nil Nil 4B 7,000
2 5-10 9-20 5 5d6+2 Nil Nil B 7,000
3 11-17 21-#4 4 7d6+3 Nil Nil B 10,000
4 18-24 35-48 3 Qd6+4 Nil Nil Bx2 =: 11,000
5 25-32 49-b4 2 ld6+5 Nil Nil Bx2 12,000
6 33441 65-82 l 13d6+6 Nil Nil B,Zx2 13,000
7 42-51 §3-102 0 15d6+7 Nil Nil C2Zx3 14,000
8 52-62 103-106 -l 17d6+8 l 25% C273 18,000
9 63-75 107-109 -2 19d6+9 2/1 35% C.zx4 20,000
10 76-91 HO-112 “3 21d6+10 3/2 45% Dzx4 =22,000
1 92-108 113-115 ad 23d6+11 4/3 55% D.Zx5 24,000
12 109-130 116-118 =5 25d6+12 5/4 65% E,2x5 25,000
 

    
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   

Dragon, Linnorm, Sea

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any fresh or salt water

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE; Any

DIET: Herbivore

INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional

TREASURE: See below

ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: ~2 (base)

MOVEMENT: 9, Sw 24

HIT DICE: 13 (base)

THACO: 7 (base)

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2 plus special

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 3d10/2d10 plus special

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spells, breath weapon, capsize
ships, surprise

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Spells

MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below

SIZE: G (48’ base length)

MORALE: Fanatic (17-18)

XP VALUE: See below

Sea linnorms are cold and vicious, viewing land dwellers as a
threat to all marine life.

The sea hatchling is nearly translucent, but its scales
become pearly and thick as it ages. From the young stage, this
linnorm can shift its color like a chameleon.

Sea linnorms speak their own language, can communicate
with all sea life, and have a 5% chance per age category to
learn how to speak any human or demihuman language.

Combat: This dragon (young and older) comes up beneath
ships and capsizes them—the ship makes a seaworthiness
check (see the DMG), and a modifier equaling the linnorm’s
combat modifier times 5 is subtracted from the roll, Hence, a
Viking longship attacked by an old linnorm has a (60 — [8 x 5]
=) 20% chance to avoid capsizing. Seas use breath weapons,
spells, and special abilities to kill any survivors, attacking with
their bites and long, barbed tails only if necessary.

To attack humans on land, the linnorm slithers out of the
sea by night and uses spells, magical abilities, and its breath
weapon on structures and ships. It then attacks survivors with
its breath weapon, biting, and tail slaps. Seriously wounded
sea linnorms retreat to the sea and plot revenge.

Breath Weapon/Special Abilities: Sea linnorm breath is a
cloud of caustic acid droplets 60 feet long, 60 feet wide, and 30
feet high (saving throw for half damage applies). This weapon
cannot be employed underwater. A sea linnorm casts spells at
a level equal to 8 plus its combat modifier. Spells come from
the spheres of Animal, Elemental, and Weather.

Sea linnorms gain the following abilities as they age, each
useable twice per day: very young—wall of fog; young—fog
cloud; juvenile—gust of wind; young adult—solid fog; adult—
airy water; mature adult—death fog; old—raise water; very old—
part water; venerable—transmute dust to water; wyrm—reverse
gravity; great wyrm—shape change.

 

 

 

 

 

The linnorm’s ability to change the color of its scales at will
gives it a chance equal to its magic resistance to remain
unseen, and it imposes a +4 modifier upon surprise rolls.

Habitat/Society: Sea linnorms are found in cool waters. While
they can maneuver equally well above or below the waves,
they spend most of their days underwater, surfacing only to
attack humans and demihumans. The lair of a sea linnorm is
always deep underwater, usually in multichambered caves.
Sea linnorms of mature adult and older stages frequently have
1d4 giant squid, 1d4 giant sea turtles, or a kraken guarding
their lairs. The linnorms hide treasure in the recesses of these
caves, hoarding gold, silver, and especially gems, jewelry, and
objects of art. Such lairs are also likely to contain spoils of bat-
tle: anchors, sails, and other parts of boats or docks.

Ecology: Sea linnorms require little food. As herbivores, they
eat primarily sea plants and are especially fond of dried sea-
weed, gathering it and placing it on rocky shores, then waiting
for it to become its tastiest in the afternoon sun.

Body Tail Breath Priest Treasure XP
Age Lgt. Lgt. AC Weapon Spells MR Type Value
1 1-12 12-32 l 2d10+1 Nil 15% Nil 5,000
2 13-23 33443 0 4d10+2 ] 20% ED 11,000
3 24-42 44-42 | 6d10+3 2 B% 4D 15,000
4 43-61 63-81 -2 §d10+4 2/1 30% D 16,000
5 62-80 82-100 - 10d10+5 2/1/1 35% DA 18,000
6 81-99 101-119 +} 12d10+6 2/2/1 40% D,A,B 19,000
7 100-118 120-138 -5 14d10+7 2/2/2/1 45%  DABx2? 20,000
8 119-137 139-157 -6 1l6d10+8 8 2/2/2/2 50% D,ABx2 21,000
9 138-156 158-176 -7 18d10+9 9 3/2/2/2 55% DAB? 72,000
10 «157-165 177-185 8 20d10+10 3/3/2/2 6% DABS 23,000
11 166-174 186-194 -9)— Bid104+11 «=«3/3/3/2 65% DABS 24,000
12) 175-183 «195-203-100 23d10412 §=63/3/3/3 70%  D,A,Bx4 25,000
Dragon, Neutral, Jacinth

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Desert
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Special
INTELLIGENCE: Genius (17-18)
TREASURE: See below
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 1 (base)
MOVEMENT: 9, Fl 27(B)

HIT DICE: 9 (base)
THACO: 13 (base)

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 plus special
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d6+1 (x2)/4d6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spells, breath weapon, special
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Spells, special

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below

SIZE: H-G (16° base length)
MORALE: Fanatic (17-18)
XP VALUE: See below

Jacinth dragons may be the rarest of any nonunique dragon
species; only a dozen at most exist on any given world.

The hide of a jacinth sparkles and shifts with many shades
of flame-bright orange in seemingly constant motion.

Jacinth dragons speak their own language, and they can
communicate telepathically with any other creature having
that ability, as well as creatures with Intelligences of 18 or
higher.

Combat: The jacinth would prefer to rely upon its breath
weapon and magical abilities in battle, but it can employ two
claw attacks and a bite if forced into close combat. Although it
is smaller than most other dragons, this specimen enjoys supe-
rior magical abilities—casting both wizard and priest spells—
making it more than a match for most adversaries.

Breath Weapon/Special Abilities: A jacinth dragon breathes a
cone of scalding air 1 foot wide at the mouth, 50 feet long, and
20 feet wide at its terminus, igniting easily combustible mate-
rials (e.g., paper, oil, and cloth) unless they successfully save
vs. normal fire. A successful save vs. breath weapon indicates,
as with most dragons, that a character suffers only half dam-
age from such an attack.

Using riddling talk and personal charm, jacinths can
entrance those who are not involved in combat or otherwise
distracted. Anyone within 90 feet who listens to a jacinth has a
10% cumulative chance per round to become affected as by a
suggestion spell. A successful save vs. spell indicates that the
character can resist the charm for at least six rounds, after
which there’s a 5% cumulative chance to be charmed. Those
who successfully save twice can’t be charmed by that dragon.

Furthermore, the jacinth dragon has the innate ability to
interplay the shades of its skin so as to have a hypnotic effect
on viewers. Thus, after three rounds of a peaceful encounter,
the dragon can attack with a +3 bonus to surprise rolls if nec-
essary. In addition, the hide reflects sunlight so brightly that

 

 

 

 

 

any creature who gazes for more than two rounds upon the
dragon on a particularly sunny day is blinded for 5d6 rounds
unless the victim rolls a successful saving throw vs. spell.

Due to its relatively small size, the fear aura of a neutral
dragon allows a +4 bonus to opponents’ saving throws. Also,
neutrals cannot polymorph themselves unless they carry the
spell of the same name. However, they do have the innate abil-
ity to blink six times per day (as a 10th-level caster).

Habitat/Society: Jacinth dragons make their homes in large
deserts, enjoying the hot, dry climate. Over the years, this
species has developed the ability to go for weeks without water
or food. They shun all other forms of life and enjoy their soli-
tude, though they can at times be overly curious of visitors.

Like all dragons, jacinths have a passion for treasure, espe-
cially for the stone after which they are named. Hence, they
venture out to obtain what little treasure they have, and it is
by these excursions that they are known to humans.

Ecology: No jacinth dragon hides have ever been taken or
sold. The only creatures known to prey upon them are adven-
turers.

Body Tail Breath Wizard/Priest Treasure XP
Age Let. Lgt. AC Weapon Spells MR Type Value
| i+ I+ 4 2d4 Nil Nil Nil 7000
2 8 7 63 3d4 2/1 Nil Nal 8,000
3 «G14 S10 2 4d4 22/2 Nil Nil 9.000
4 $1518 4-3 1 5d4 222/21 Nil E,T 11,000
5 19-20 1416 0 6d4 2222/22 15% FLT 14,000
6 21-22 17-19 -1 7d4 22222/221 20% H,R,Tx2 15,000
7 23-26 20-22 -2 &d4 222222/222 2540 H,R,Tx2 16,000
8 27-28 23-25 -3 9d4 -2222222/2221 30% HALRI 17,000
9 230 26-28 + dd 3322222/2222 35% H,LR.Tx4 18,000
10 31-32 29-31 -5 dt 3333222/22221 40% H,b2,R,Tx4 19,000
ll 33-MoO32-34 -h12d4  333.39332/22222 45% Hbe2,R,Tx4 20,000

12 35-36 35-37

~

3d4  443353532/33322 50% H3R,Tx5 21,000
 

L

Dragon, Neutral, Jade

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate oriental forests
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary or clan
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Genius (17-18)
TREASURE: See below
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1d3

ARMOR CLASS: 0 (base)
MOVEMENT: 9, Fl 24(B)

HIT DICE: 7 (base)

THACO: 13 (base)

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 plus special
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d6 (x2) /5d4
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Breath weapon, spells, special
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Spells, special
MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below

SIZE: H-G (18° base length)
MORALE: Fanatic (17-18)

XP VALUE: See below

The jade dragon is the Oriental cousin to the emerald dragon
of the western world. This dragon is usually considered myth-
ical by humans and is sought by only a few adventurous thrill
seekers. Slightly more powerful than its western cousin, this
creature looks the same as other Oriental dragons, except that
it has wings with which to fly. The hide of a jade dragon is
made up of several different shades of green, swirled about in
a random pattern.

Jade dragons speak their own language, and they can com-
municate telepathically with any other creature having that
ability, as well as creatures with Intelligences of 18 or higher.

Combat: Jade dragons use their breath weapons and magical
abilities to defend themselves if possible, but they can also
employ two claw attacks and a bite if forced into melee.
Although they are smaller and weaker than their more com-
mon relatives, they enjoy excellent spellcasting abilities, pos-
sessing both wizard and priest spells.

Breath Weapon/Special Abilities: A jade dragon is able to
breathe a powerful sonic wail. All those within a 90-foot
radius suffer damage and must successfully save vs. breath
weapon or be deafened for 1d6 x 10 rounds. Even if the save is
successful, the victim is deafened for 2d6 rounds. In addition,
all victims must make a successful system shock check in
order to avoid being knocked unconscious for 5d4 rounds.
Using riddling talk and personal charm, jade dragons can
entrance those who are not involved in combat or otherwise
distracted. Anyone within 90 feet who listens to a jade has a
10% cumulative chance per round to become affected as by a
suggestion spell. A successful save vs. spell indicates that the
character can resist the charm for at least six rounds, after
which there’s a 5% cumulative chance to be charmed. Those
who successfully save twice can’t be charmed by that dragon.
Due to its relatively small size, the fear aura of a neutral

 

 

 

 

dragon allows a +4 bonus to opponents’ saving throws. Also,
neutrals cannot polymorph themselves unless they carry the
spell of the same name. However, they do have the innate abil-
ity to blink six times per day (as a 10th-level caster).

Habitat/Society: Jade dragons make their lairs in dense
forests, as they are avid collectors of rare woods. Like other
neutral dragons, they are extremely reclusive creatures, pre-
ferring remote lairs, and they aren’t very hospitable to unex-
pected visitors. They love treasure, especially jade, and will
bargain for precious and semiprecious stones.

Ecology: Jades live entirely on forest vegetation and animal
life, and will not eat humans. No jade dragon hide has ever
been sold, so its value is unknown. The few jade dragons that
have been seen were reported to be exquisitely beautiful, and
there are many who would pay great sums to acquire such a

hide.

Body = Tail Breath Wizard/Priest Treasure XP
Age Let. Lgt AC Weapon Spells MR Type Value
1 265 + 3 Id6+1 Nil Nil Nil 7,000
2 @10 38 2 2d6+2 Nil Nil Nil 5,000
+ i-b $m 1 3d6+3 2/1 Nil D 9,000
4 1620 1316 0 446+ 22/2 5% E 11,000
5 21-25 17-20 -1 5d6+5 222/21 10% H 13,000
6 26-30 21-24 -2 6d6+6 2222/22 15% Hl 14,000
7 31-35 25-28 -3 7d6+7 22222/221 20% HJ 15,000
8 3640 29-32 -4 8d6+8 222222/222 25% j§ HAx2 16,000
9 41445 33-36 -5 #(9d6+9 9 8 2222222/2221 W% 4Hik2 17,000
10 46-50 3740 - 10d6+10 3322222/2222 35% H2,R 18,000

45%  HIx2,R 19,000

I} 51-55 41-44 =?) Wd6+11 §=3333222/ I
333332/ 2 55% H.b3,R,U 20,000

12 5660 45458 -8 I2d6+12 3333332/
Dragon, Neutral, Pearl

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Rocky coastlines, cliffs
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary or clan
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (15-16)
TREASURE: See below
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1d3

ARMOR CLASS: 2 (base)
MOVEMENT: 9, Fl 18(C), Sw 12

HIT DICE: 6 (base)

THACO: 15 (base)

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 plus special
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4+1 (x2)/3d6/special
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spells, breath weapon, special
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Spells, special
MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below

SIZE: H-G (14 base)
MORALE: Fanatic (16-17)

XP VALUE: See below

Pearl dragons are easily identifiable because their scales
appear to be made of that precious substance for which they
are named. As they age, their scales become increasingly lus-
trous.

Pearl dragons speak their own language, and they can
communicate telepathically with any other creature having
that ability, as well as creatures with Intelligences of 18 or
higher. “

Combat: Pearls prefer to employ their breath weapons and
magical abilities in combat, but they can deliver two claw
attacks and a bite if necessary. They are smaller and weaker
than many other dragons, but they possess superior magic
capabilities and are able to cast both wizard and priest spells.

Breath Weapon/Special Abilities: Pearl dragons can breathe a
cloud of scalding steam once every three rounds, measuring
90 feet long, 30 feet wide, and 20 feet high. A successful saving
throw vs. breath weapon halves the inflicted damage.

Using riddling talk and personal charm, pearl dragons can
entrance those who are not involved in combat or otherwise
distracted. Anyone within 90 feet who listens to a pearl has a
10% cumulative chance per round to become affected as by a
suggestion spell. A successful save vs. spell indicates that the
character can resist the charm for at least six rounds, after
which there’s a 5% cumulative chance to be charmed. Those
who successfully save twice can’t be charmed by that dragon.

Due to its relatively small size, the fear aura of a neutral
dragon allows a +4 bonus to opponents’ saving throws. Also,
neutrals cannot polymorph themselves unless they carry that
spell, but, they have the ability to blink six times per day (as a
10th-level caster).

Habitat/Society: Pearl dragons reside on steep, rocky coast-
lines or along sandy beaches, as long as they are near the
water. They love the salty air and the open expanse of the sea.

 

 

 

 

 

It is not surprising that pearl dragons spend most of the
day pearl hunting. Over the centuries, this species has devel-
oped powerful lungs exclusively for this purpose, and a pear!
dragon can stay under water for up to an hour without surfac-
ing for air. For this reason, a pearl dragon hoard can contain
up to 5,000 gp in pearls for every age level the dragon has
(these pearls are in addition to normal treasure types).

Pearl dragons are somewhat nomadic, leaving one place
for another once the food or pearl supply has run low. The
moving process is very slow, for the dragon refuses to leave a
single object behind in its previous lair.

Like all neutral dragons, pearl dragons remain at a safe dis-
tance from human civilization. They rarely attack sailing ves-
sels, though they have been known to attack bothersome
pirate ships and take whatever treasure they can find.

Ecology: Pearl dragons are natural enemies of dragon turtles.
Their diet consists mainly of sharks and fish, with an occa-
sional hundred lobsters or a small whale as a treat. The hide of
a pearl dragon is extremely beautiful and can be sold for as
much as 60,000 gp.

Body Tail Breath Wizard/Priest Treasure XP
Age Let. Lgt. AC Weapon Spells MR Type Value
1 4 13 5 Id4+1 Nil Nil Nil 1,400
2 5-8 +6 4 = 2d442 Nil Nil Nil 2,000
3 912 79 3  3d443 Nil Nil Nil —- 2,000
4 13-16 10-12 2 4d4+4 2/1 5% E 4,000
5 17-20 1315 1 5d4+5 22/21 10% H 5,000
6 21-24 1618 0 6d4+6 222/22 15% H,U* = 7,000
7 25-28 19-21 -1 7d447 2222/221 20% H,Ux2* 9,000
8 29-32 22-24 -2 8d4+8 22222/222 25%  H,Ux2* 10,000
9 33-36 2528 -3 9d4+9 222222/2221 We  H,Ux2" 11,000
10 37-40 29-3] —-4 Wd4+10 2222222/2222 35%  H,Ux3" 12,000
HW 41-44 32-34-5441] 0 «0-39322222/22221 40% H,Uxd* 13,000
12 4548 35-38 +6 U2d4+12) 3333222/22222 45%  H,Uxd* 14,000

* All gems in treasure type U are actually pearls.

 
Dragon-kin

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any land
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Tribe
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: See below
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 2d8

ARMOR CLASS: 3
MOVEMENT: 6, Fl 15(B)

HIT DICE: 7

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d6 (x2) or by weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: L (7'-9" long)
MORALE: Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: 1,400

 

 

These creatures are rumored to be very distant cousins of
dragons. Somewhere along the evolutionary chain, they
developed humanoid characteristics. They still display the
dragonlike face and wings, yet they also have a humanoid
form.

Dragon-kin speak their own, sibilant language and can

speak a rough form of Common as well.
Combat: When they expect combat, dragon-kin take to the air
so they can have the upper hand. They attempt to remain air-
borne as long as possible, then swoop down to rake their
claws against a target. They always target any magical items—
which they can detect as if a detect magic spell were cast—in
preference to anything else, including spellcasters. If they
make a successful attack roll against the item (treat as AC 10
plus magical and the holder’s Dexterity bonuses), they seize
the item and flee with it to their lair. Half of the time, they
don’t return to the fight, remaining in their cave instead,
admiring their newfound acquisition.

If forced to bring combat to the ground, they move in and
use their claws or weapons. They are easily distracted by mag-
ical items, especially if one of them becomes ‘ ‘separated” from
its owner. However, they are not as likely to flee from combat
if they can wrest one from its owner under these circum-
stances; unless they can do so without fear of retaliation, they
will stay and resolve the combat. They are smart enough to
guard against back attacks and will never, under any circum-
stance, allow this to take place if it can possibly be avoided.

Dragon-kin never use their captured magical items in com-
bat, for fear of losing them. This is viewed as their biggest dis-
advantage, for they are forced instead to rely on mundane
weapons or their claws. This, unfortunately for the dragon-
kin, makes them easy targets for those with experience in
fighting aerial creatures.

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: The dragon-kin live in a tribal setting, with a
leader determined by combat and ownership of the most pow-
erful magical items. Any leader defeated in combat, but not
killed, will be eliminated and replaced by the tribe.

If an adventuring party should happen into a dragon-kin
den, they will find half of the residents left to protect what is
theirs. If these are defeated, there are 1d2 nonpermanent mag-
ical items (e.g., potions and limited-charge wands) per resi-
dent dragon-kin. There is a cumulative 10% chance per
resident that a permanent magical item is in the batch. Hence,
a lair of six has a 60% chance of containing a permanent item,
and there will always be at least one permanent item in a lair
of 10 or more.

Dragon-kin are often found in the service of a powerful
dragon or mage. They have an insatiable desire for magical
items, regardless of whether they ever use the item them-
selves. The only payment dragon-kin mercenaries expect is
magical or enspelled items, for only these items hold any fasci-
nation for them.

Ecology: Dragon-kin are a blight on any area’s ecology. They
have no regard for others and simply take what they want.
They have no natural predators, although there is a large
bounty for them in any place that has known their depreda-
tions. They eat nearly anything that can be chewed, although,
of course, they prefer the meat of sentient beings—the more
intelligent, the better.

Unlike their larger cousins, dragon-kin have no love of con-
ventional treasure. If a hoard has no magic, they are not inter-
ested in it. Dragon-kin simply leave coins and nonmagical
items where they lie. There is only a 50% chance that dragon-
kin will attack a party if it is not carrying magical items. They
will always attack those who carry such items.
Dread

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any land
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary or group (as created)
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Non (0)
TREASURE: Any (as guardian)
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1 or 1d6
ARMOR CLASS: 6
MOVEMENT: 6, Fl 15(B), Sw 9, Jp 3
HIT DICE: 3+3
THACO: 17
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4 or by weapon type
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil
SIZE: S (up to 4’ long)
MORALE: Fearless (20)
XP VALUE: 975

1400—vampiric dread

Dread are flying, animated skeletal arms that attack living
things by raking with their sharpened fingerbones or by
wielding weapons. These undead are created by wizards and
priests to serve as guardians. The enchantment involves a set
of instructions (similar to the specific triggering conditions for
a magic mouth spell), in which the creator of the dread specifies
where they are to operate;and under what circumstances they
will and won’t attack. The spells also allow the bone to regen-
erate damage done to it, and to resist aging effects.

Long ago, families who could not afford better, or could not
bring themselves to trust hireswords, had dread created to
guard their treasure vaults. Typically these were armed with
magical swords, and many dread encountered are so armed.

Dread are often ordered to attack all intruders who do not
speak a certain password or wear a particular badge. In other
cases, they are instructed to slay all living things entering a
particular place such as a “trap” passage or room that leads
nowhere and is intended only as a deathtrap.

Combat: Dread wield weapons (often scimitars or hand axes;
they can use anything up to 50 lbs. in weight and 10 feet in
overall length) as they fly menacingly through the darkness.
In many cases, they are left in niches where no human could
lurk, or partway down shafts, or above trap doors, so an
intruder cannot avoid their initial attack. Dread can also be
positioned to repeatedly hurl or drop rocks down a shaft that
intruders are climbing.

Dread are turned as shadows (but in certain “prime guard”
areas, enchantments prevent most dread from being turned—
or dispelled—at all), and they are immune to charm, hold, and
sleep spells. Cold-based attacks inflict no damage upon them,
holy water causes 2d4 points of damage per vial (1d4 if only a
splash hits), and edged or piercing weapons deal only half
damage to them. The enchantments that animate them also
make them specifically immune to shatter, disintegrate, and all

 

 

 

 

related and polymorph spells.

If damaged, dread regenerate 2 lost hit points per day.

Dread are sometimes concealed amid bones of the fallen
creatures they guard (e.g., in a coffin) or, in some cases, a pile
formed of the remains of their victims. They often lie unmov-
ing until intruders are within 10 feet, and they can wield bones
or hurl skulls as weapons. In either case, bones inflict 1d4
points of damage if thrown and 1d4 + 1 if wielded as
weapons—at each blow, roll a die: Any odd result means the
bone has shattered beyond a usable state. Dread themselves
have been made immune to such ready breakage.

Habitat/Society: Dread are found only as guardians (or, very
rarely, as weapons-practice sparring partners or wizards’
helpers in a spellcasting chamber).

Ecology: Dread have no life processes, consuming and need-
ing nothing. Their powdered bones can be used as an ingredi-
ent in certain preservative magics and in spells concerned
with flight, telekinesis, and levitation.

Vampiric Dread: These rare specimens of dread must slay a
living thing at least once per year to prolong their unlife.
When they inflict damage (barehanded, not with a weapon) to
a living being, half the hit points lost by their victims (round
down) are immediately gained by the dread. These extra hit
points fade only at the rate of 1 per ride (10 days). Many vam-
piric dread can wander (hunt) freely, as their boundary
enchantments are linked to specific stones that have crumbled
away. Vampiric dread are often depicted in warning tales and
paintings, dripping the blood of victims as they fly along.

 
 

Elemental, Earth Weird

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any dry terrain
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: See below
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)
TREASURE: 1,0,P,Y
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 0
MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 8+3
THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: ]
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d8
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Smothering
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: L (10°+ long)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 5,000

These creatures are inhabitants of the Elemental Plane of
Earth, but they have often been encountered more recently on
the Prime Material Plane. They are related to the water weird,
both of them filling a specific niche in their respective planes’
ecologies.

When encountered on the Prime Material, earth weirds are
invariably hostile and tend to attack all living things quite
quickly. Once they have vanquished a foe, they feed off the
remains as it decomposes within their substance.

Combat: When first encountered, these creatures appear to be
nothing more than an exceptionally dry spot of dirt on the
road. The use of a detect invisibility spell reveals that something
is amiss, but nothing specific can be determined until the crea-
ture shows itself.

Once the earth weird senses a living creature within 10 feet,
it starts to form itself into the likeness of a huge earthen ser-
pent. This transformation takes two rounds to complete. Once
in this shape, the earth weird lashes out at anything within its
considerable 15-foot range.

Most forms of attack have little effect on the earth weird.
Normal edged and blunt weapons inflict only 1 point of dam-
age per attack, and Strength bonuses have no effect. Piercing
weapons never affect the weird, which flows around the dam-
age and repairs itself instantly. Enchanted weapons have full
effect and inflict normal damage.

A water attack affects the weird as a slow spell and enables
normal bludgeoning and slashing weapons to have full effect.
If an earth weird is completely immersed in water for over 10
rounds, it dissolves. A wind wall or control winds spell inflicts
1d10 points of damage upon the weird and causes it to lose
initiative for two rounds.

A weird reduced to 0 hit points is not destroyed, just dis-
rupted. It takes four turns for the weird to recorporate itself.
Once done, it attacks as before, a fresh creature. A weird must

 

 

 

 

 

be reduced to -10 hit points before it is completely destroyed.
Plant growth or spike growth is one of the most effective ways to
stop an earth weird. It takes an earth weird one hour to work
its way out of the effect of a plant/spike growth spell. A passwall
or move earth spell kills it instantly, as do magical items that
involve digging.

Habitat/Society: Earth weirds tend to be solitary and territor-
ial. Though they will not always attack other weirds, they
show aggressive behavior until the trespassing weird leaves or
initiates combat. Earth weirds favor dry areas. This does not
necessarily mean deserts, but includes drier areas of forests,
especially along paths where it might find prey among the
animals of the forest and passing adventurers. Once a weird
has staked out a spot, it seldom leaves that area.

Ecology: It is unknown what keeps an earth weird alive. It is
surmised that they must feed off the bodies of their prey, prob-
ably through the blood that leeches into the soil, fertilizing an
already fierce opponent.

Sages theorize that the first earth weird on the Prime Mate-
rial Plane was summoned by a powerful mage, and it may
have been abandoned by its old master. Some may have found
their way through rare dimensional vortices, while others are
the result of cruel pranksters or evil men.

Since they are not native to the Prime Material Plane, earth
weirds tend to have a hard time finding a niche in any ecosys-
tem. It is likely, however, that they will be a dominant feature
in any landscape in which they appear.

Earth-weird dirt is valued by wizards for spell compo-
nents. Pieces of these weirds are especially useful in various
spells involving earth, including passwall, flesh to stone, and
stone to mud.
Elemental, Sandman

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Subtropical or tropical / desert
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Family
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night
DIET: Minerals
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: A,Q
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: 1d6
ARMOR CLASS: 3
MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 4

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: Nil
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Sleep
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 20%

SIZE: M (5’-6' tall)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 975

The sandman’s name describes it exactly: It is a manlike biped
made entirely of sand, held together by magical cohesion.
Sandmen are creatures of the Elemental Plane of Earth, but on
the Prime Material Plane they serve as slave-takers of the dao.
Their ability to capture foes unharmed makes them especially
successful in this role.

Sandmen apparently communicate telepathically between
themselves, but they speak no languages—indeed, they do not
speak at all—and only dao seem to be able to understand what
they are thinking. Sandmen can understand what other intelli-
gent creatures are saying (or perhaps thinking), however.

Combat: Sandmen prefer to fight from ambush or at night,
when they can flee encounters that go against them, Any char-
acter or monster coming within 20 feet of a sandman must
successfully save vs. spell or fall asleep, regardless of experi-
ence level. (Elves remain 90% resistant to this effect.) Those
who manage to stay awake must attempt to save again each
time they touch a sandman or are touched by it (a hit on the
sandman with a weapon does not constitute a touch).

Once a sandman has put a victim to sleep, it takes no fur-
ther hostile action against him, leaving him to doze while the
sandmen and the dao take the victim to slave markets, or
while the sleepers are simply ejected from their lands.

Victims remain asleep for three full turns regardless of
noise, motion, or magic applied to them. Thereafter, there is a
cumulative 10% chance per turn of a sleeper waking of his
own accord, and a 95% chance per round of him waking if vio-
lently disturbed. Creatures attacked while asleep are automat-
ically hit for maximum damage for a single round of attacks,
but thereafter, they may respond normally.

Sandmen have the natural ability of protection from normal
missiles. Missiles striking a sandman simply pass through its
form and fall to the ground.

 

 

 

 

 

When a sandman is slain, it immediately crumbles into
dust.

Habitat/Society: Sandmen automatically attack humans and
need never check morale. Sandmen hate humans because
human and demihuman mages often slay them simply to use
their remains in working magic. This is why sandmen always
seek out human or demihuman slaves for their dao masters—
for revenge.

Ecology: Sandmen are often slaves of the dao. They are
allowed to win their freedom by bringing replacement slaves
to dao nobles, to take their places. The dao have learned to
bind sandmen through the use of magical amulets; this
ensures that sandmen sent to the Prime Material Plane to fetch
more slaves do not simply run away, Sandmen hate their mas-
ters fiercely, but they loathe humans even more, for they con-
sider them weak. They despise any creature that they can
ensorcel into sleep, and they fear any creature immune to their
powers.

Sandmen seem to require neither food nor drink, and they
are excellent at surviving even the harshest deserts or mines.
They derive their food from stone, sand, and dust, and can
starve only if they are kept airborne for a lengthy period.

The powder into which a destroyed sandman crumbles can
be used to make a potion of dreaming or sand of truth. If used as
the material component in a sleep spell, the spell affects double
the normal number of levels or Hit Dice. The dust of a sand-
man is enough for only one potion or two spells.

 
 

 

Elemental, Wind Walker

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical mountains, deserts, and
plains

FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Pack

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Special

INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)

TREASURE: CR

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1d3

ARMOR CLASS: 7

MOVEMENT: Fl 30(A)

HIT DICE: 6+3

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 per creature within 10°

 

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 3d6

 

SPECIAL ATTACKS: _ Attack in series
SPECIAL DEFENSES: _ Spell immunities
MAGIC RESISTANCE: — See below

SIZE: L (10’-12' long)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)

XP VALUE: 2,000

Wind walkers are creatures from the Elemental Plane of Air,
where they are the servants of the djinn. On the Prime Mater-
ial Plane, they prefer to live high in the mountains or in great
caverns far below the surface.

Their approach is detectable at 100 to 300 yards asa
whistling, howling, or roaring, depending on the number
coming. Normally only faintly visible, in fog or sandstorms
they look like a mass of coiling, writhing serpents, constantly
churning out tendrils of wind and losing fragments of them-
selves as trailing bits of vapor or dust. Whenever they touch
the ground, they spin off tiny whirlwinds, pushing dust and
grit into the air.

Combat: Wind walkers are telepathic and can detect thoughts
within 100 yards. If they work in series to boost their range,
they may detect thoughts within 300 yards.

Wind walkers attack by wind force. Each wind walker
causes 3d6 points of damage per round to all creatures within
10 feet. They can disperse any cloud or gaseous attack in a sin-
gle round (though they suffer its full effects for that round),
and they inflict double damage (6d6) upon creatures in
gaseous form. The noise of their movement can cover most
sounds of combat; if they wish, a battle with them sounds only
like rushing winds, as all shrieks and cries are carried away by
the force of their wind.

Wind walkers are partially ethereal and thus can be fought
by other ethereal creatures such as genies, invisible stalkers, or
aerial servants. A weapon of +1 or better enchantment is
required to hit them in any event.

These creatures are immune to most spell attacks, but are
affected by certain spells such as control weather (unless the
walker makes a successful save vs. spell, it dies), slow (dam-
ages the monster as a fireball), and ice storm (drives the crea-
tures away for 1d4 melee rounds). Haste inflicts half the
damage of a fireball upon wind walkers, but it also doubles the

 

 

 

 

 

amount of damage inflicted by them. Magical barriers like pro-
tection from evil, wall of force, or prismatic wall stop them
(though blade barrier is ineffective). Wind walkers otherwise
pursue their victims for a minimum of 1d4 + 1 rounds, They
are subject to attack by telepathy.

_ With effort, wind walkers can also moderate their winds to
a less violent level, and thus they have the spell-like ability to
cast ride the wind four times daily as a 12th-level caster.

Habitat/Society: Wind walkers are kept as cloud sculptors by
the djinn. Other creatures have retained them to herd rain
clouds to their lands, or to keep the life-giving rains from oth-
ers. Desert tribesmen are careful not to insult the wind walkers
or to disparage them as mere servants of the djinn—the genie
races are powerful, and even their servants must be feared.

Wind walkers are sometimes forced into servitude by
storm giants, cloud giants, djinn, and other creatures of the
windy mountains.

Wind walkers keep to themselves; the only elementals they
willingly associate with are air elementals. Some sages believe
that wind walkers are simply young air elementals, while oth-
ers are sure that they are a separate species.

Ecology: Wind walkers eat only airborne water vapor and
minute particles of dust. Strangely, they seem to enjoy strong
fragrances and can be lured into traps or binding circles with
aromatic oils or essences. Unless kept as servants by djinn or
wizards, they get their food from the clouds.
Elemental Kin, Earth, Crysmal

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any land
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Petrivore
INTELLIGENCE: High to exceptional (13-16)
TREASURE: Qx2d4
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: 1d6

ARMOR CLASS: 0
MOVEMENT: 6

HIT DICE: 6+6

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: l
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 3d4 (2d4)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Crystal missile
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: S (3' tall)
MORALE: Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: 4,000
PSIONIC SUMMARY:
Level Dis/Sci/Dev Att/Def Score PSPs
7 3/4/12 MT,EW /M— 15 91-110

Metapsionics: Sciences—appraise; Devotions—psychic drain,
receptacle, stasis field.

Psychokinesis: Sciences—project force; Devotions—animate
object, change sound, create sound, soften.

Telepathy: Sctences—mindwipe, probe; Devotions—contact,
ego whip, ESP, mind thrust, mind blank.

The crysmal is a crystalline creature from the Elemental Plane
of Earth. It is occasionally encountered on the Prime Material
Plane, but only in subterranean places rich in mineral forma-
tions that form its diet (particularly favored are quartz, beryl,
corundum, and carbon crystals). A crysmal often attacks in
order to gain these minerals. Inside an individual crysmal will
be found 4d8 undigested rough gems.

Crysmals look like truncated, prismed heaps of translucent
crystals. An individual crysmal tends to be of one color, rang-
ing from pale amber through olive and into deep violet.

Combat: Because of its crystalline nature, edged and piercing
weapons used against a crysmal must attack a penalty of -4.
Against blunt metallic or stone weapons, a crysmal’s effective
AC is 0, and normal wooden weapons are ineffective. The
structure of the crysmal also makes it slow. Its faceted walk-
ing appendages (4—6) allow for only stumping, jerky move-
ment. A crysmal attacks with a sharp, rotating appendage
that extrudes from its top. If sorely pressed, the monster can
shoot this appendage up to 60 feet, inflicting 1d8 + 8 point of
damage. Thereafter, the crysmal has only a secondary
appendage with which to attack, and its damage range drops
from 3d4 to 2d4.

A crysmal is unaffected by fire- or cold-based spells, Elec-
trical attacks cause only one-quarter or no damage whatso-
ever, depending on the saving throw. Poisons and gases do not

 

 

 

 

 

inflicts 3d6 points of damage upon a crysmal, a glassee spell
blinds it for 1d4 + 1 rounds, and a stone fo flesh spell lowers its
Armor Class to 6 for all weapons, lasting one melee round.
The creature can move through solid rock or earth as a xorn
does, taking one round to shift its molecular structure to do so.
If struck by a phase door spell when shifting, the creature is
immediately slain.

Habitat/Society: Crysmals live in roving packs with a clearly
defined separation of duties between individuals. However,
these duties are fluid, and individual crysmals may change
positions freely. Psionically powerful crysmals are most often
the leaders.

Ecology: Crysmals absorb stone and transform it into ordered,
living matter, mostly quartzlike crystals. Sages have reported
that crysmals fed precious stones develop better health, a
greater resistance to damage, and more potent psionic powers,
but few can afford the handfuls of diamonds, sapphires, and
topazes that the crysmals can devour in a single day.

When removed from a silicate environment, crysmals
slowly starve. In extreme cases they cannibalize other min-
eral creatures or their own bodies, shrinking each day but
retaining their form. After a full month, starving crysmals
become about the size of a paperweight. They die within
another week.

Crysmals hate xorn, as the latter prey on them. They some-
times ally themselves with the dao, as they enjoy the rich food
and the freedom from fear that the dao provide. The dao sim-
ply consider the crysmals good and trustworthy slaves. Crys-
mals sometimes tame chaggrin with their psionic abilities, and
keep them as servants.

 
 

 

Elementral Kin, Fire, Azer

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any fire

FREQUENCY: Very rare (common)

ORGANIZATION: Band

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)

TREASURE: Special

ALIGNMENT: Lawful neutral

NO. APPEARING: 2d8

ARMOR CLASS: 2

MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 2+1 to 5+4

THACO: 19to 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: By weapon type

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Heat

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Immune to fire

MAGIC RESISTANCE:  5-20%

SIZE: M (5° tall)

MORALE: Elite (13-14)

XP VALUE: 2+1 HD—420
3+2 HD—650
4+3 HD—975
5+4 HD—1,400

The azer are a race of humanoid creatures that normally
inhabit the Elemental Plane of Fire. Except under special cir-
cumstances, they are very rarely found on the Prime Material
Plane.

In appearance they are much like dwarves, except that they
have metallic, brass-colored skin and flames for hair. They
wear only kilts or apronlike garments of beaten brass, copper,
or bronze.

Combat: Azer use broad-bladed javelins that inflict damage as
spears. In hand-to-hand combat, they employ malletlike
weapons equal to a footman’s mace. Due to their great
strength, their attack and damage rolls are adjusted as follows:

HD STR Attack Damage
2+1 17 +1 +1
3+2 18 +1 +2
443 18/01-50 +1 +3
544 18/51-00 +2 +3

Creatures not immune to fire suffer 1d4 + 1 points of damage
if grasped by an azer, and the heat of an azer’s weapons
inflicts an additional +1 damage to such victims. Azer suffer
double damage from cold-based attacks.

Habitat/Society: Azer on their home plane are part of an
extremely regimented society where every individual has his
or her place. The azer civilization in general is heavily strati-
fied, with law taking precedence over individual freedoms
and even an individual's life.

Azer construct their outposts and cities as complexes of
towers built from basalt, granite, or metal. There they dwell in
small groups, using their plentiful flames to shape the stone.

 

 

 

 

 

They grow strange trees with metallic outer skins or barks,
and the leaves of these trees are actually made entirely of
metal—in some cases, precious metals.

Azer are unfriendly and taciturn, and they lack compas-
sion. They capture and interrogate intruders; particularly dan-
gerous or violent prisoners are slain. They are greedy,
particularly for gems that are a clear purple or red (rubies,
amethysts, garnets, etc.). Once given, the word of an azer is a
solid bond.

Ecology: It is not known just what—if anything—azer eat. On
their home plane, their only enemies are other intelligent fire-
dwelling creatures, and even then this enmity is not related to
relative position on the food chain. The greatest of their ene-
mies are the efreet, who sometimes fight wars of conquest
against the azer, taking their territories and making slaves of
them. The azer defend themselves and their towers with pow-
erful, bellows-like air projectors and special containers used to
pour elemental water on attackers.

Amaimon
Amaimon is the legendary king of the azer. He is the largest
(9 + 8 HD), strongest (18/00 Strength), and most intelligent of
all azer. He has 35% magic resistance; his other powers are
unknown.

Nobles

Amaimon’s nobles number from 8d4 and are only slightly
weaker than their king (7 + 6 HD, 18/76-90 Strength). They
have 25% magic resistance; the noble azers’ full powers are
also unknown.

 
Elemental Vermin

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Air (Duster) Earth (Crawler) Fire (Flameling) Water (Spitter)

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any Any Any dry, warm Any moist, cool
FREQUENCY: Rare Rare Rare Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary Pack Pack Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any Any Any
DIET: Scents, flowers, Vegetable and Any flammable Any liquid

ambergris mineral matter material
INTELLIGENCE: Semi (2-4) Animal (1) Semi (2-4) Animal (1)
TREASURE: See below See below See below See below
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Neutral Neutral Neutral
NO. APPEARING: ] 1d6 2d4 1
ARMOR CLASS: 4 3 4 6
MOVEMENT: 6, Fl 6(A) 6, Bré 6, Fl 6(A) 6, Sw 6
HIT DICE: 2 2 2 2
THACO: 19 19 19 19
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 3 2 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4 1d3 (x3) 1d3/1d2 1d4
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Obscurement Rear claws—1d4 (x2) See below Spit
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Invisibility Disguise Immune to fire Regeneration
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil Nil Nil Nil
SIZE: T (18’ tall) T (1' tall) T (9’ tall) T(1’ tall)
MORALE: Average (8-10) Champion (15-16) Elite (13-14) Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 175 175 175 175

These vermin are creatures from the elemental planes, They
are scavengers that seek to eat anything which looks good to
them, regardless of its relative value or use to anybody else.
On the Inner Planes they are simply pests, but they can be a
greater problem on the Prime Material Plane.

Each type of elemental vermin is basically humanoid in
shape, but most observers would think of them as reptilian at
first look; more complete descriptions can be found in the
individual entries below.

Elemental vermin do not speak any languages, and their
relatively low intelligences make any sort of telepathic contact
fairly unrewarding.

Combat: Above all, these creatures simply want to eat, and
they interpret any interruption of that activity as offensive.
Though some elemental vermin would rather run away than
fight, all fight tenaciously if cornered or disturbed during
feeding. Each has a special attack and a special defense,
described below.

Habitat/Society: Elemental vermin travel to the Prime Mate-
rial Plane through various gates such as vortices (which
occur in places like tornados [air], deep caverns [earth], vol-
canos [fire], and ocean trenches [water]) and those created
through the use of magic. They often appear in places fre-
quented by genies and elementals, but they prefer to live in
areas heavy in their element (high nests for dusters, burrows
for crawlers, fires and furnaces for flamelings, and wells and
rivers for spitters).

Ecology: While they're just normal scavengers on their home
planes, elemental vermin are detrimental to their environ-
ments on the Prime Material Plane. They have tastes for things
that are important to humans, such as perfume, gems, silks,

and wine, and they can be rather dangerous.

There is no known use for or by-product of elemental ver-
min. Their elemental “essence” is too weak to be of any use in
the making of potions, and no one would buy a captured ver-
min unless they had some peculiar revenge in mind.

 

 

 

 

 

 
Elemental Vermin

 

 

 

 

 

 

Duster

This weak air elemental is a variety of the dust devil, the crea-
ture summoned by the 2nd-level priest spell dust devil. A
duster looks something like a gray armadillo that stands
upright on its two hind legs, with human hands, long ears,
and a long proboscis. The duster’s sense of smell is acute, and
it feeds upon anything that has astrong odor.

Dusters would rather run away than fight. They use their
abilities to fly, and to become invisible (as the spell) at will, to
their advantage. If forced into melee, the duster attacks with
its sharp beak. As it attacks, it creates a whirlwind that
obscures normal vision and extinguishes small, open, non-
magical flames within 10 feet. Those who are within the dust
cloud are blinded as long as they remain there, and for one
round after they emerge, suffering a ++ penalty to attack rolls.

Crawler

This rather weak earth elemental still has vicious claws and a
crested, doglike head with sharp teeth and brushlike feelers
attached to the snout. These feelers help the creature sense its
way through the dark tunnels of the Elemental Plane of Earth
and find tasty morsels to eat. The crawler is primarily brown
in color, which allows it to blend with its surroundings when
it is standing within any rocky or earthen environment. As a
result, all opponents suffer —2 modifiers to their surprise rolls
when they stumble upon a crawler.

Crawlers are very temperamental, leaping to the attack
when disturbed or prevented from dining upon anything that
catches their fancy. Once they find a source of food, especially
precious gems and metals (such as coins), they will stubbornly
defend it from all other creatures. They attack with two claws
and a bite. Furthermore, if both front claws successfully hit
during any round of attack, they draw up their rear claws and
automatically rake with them for additional damage.

Flameling

The flameling’s head looks something like an alligator’s, but it
has bulging, forward-facing eyes and a crest of stiff tentacles
that serve as sensory organs. It appears to be covered in red,
flamelike scales that throw off small flickers of light and spark,

Flamelings enjoy the taste of flammable liquids such as oil
and alcoholic spirits, and they are often drawn to the light and
warmth of campfires when they roam the Prime Material
Plane.

The flameling is a weak fire elemental, and therefore it uses
flame and is resistant to heat. Fire-based attacks of any sort,
magical or nonmagical, have no effect upon a flameling.

Even more temperamental than crawlers, these creatures
attack with a bite and a slap from their macelike tails. In addi-
tion, they can throw miniature fireballs at opponents up to 10
feet away, twice per round. The radius of the burst is just 5
feet, and the resulting flames inflict only 1 point of damage,
but they ignite flammable materials, which must successfully
save vs. magical fire or suffer 1d4 points of damage per round
until they are extinguished.

Spitter

The water elemental vermin’s head, hands, and feet look very
much like those of a frog, though the mouth is filled with
many sharp teeth. Its body is greenish, has a tail, and is cov-
ered in ridges and bumps.

The spitter avoids confrontations if possible, but it is drawn
to all forms of liquids, including water bottles, holy water
vials, and potions, and it will attack creatures that attempt to
prevent it from reaching those things. In combat the spitter
attacks with a bite or by spitting a pellet of water with such
force that it actually inflicts 1d4 points of damage. It can spit
these pellets once per round, at will, striking targets up to 20
feet away.

 
Faerie, Petty

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Squeaker Stwinger
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any land Any temperate
FREQUENCY: Common Common (rare)
ORGANIZATION: Tribe Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Night
DIET: Nil Herbivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7) High (13-14)
TREASURE: Nil Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic (any) Chaotic neutral
NO. APPEARING: 2d20 1 (2-4)
ARMOR CLASS: 10 7
MOVEMENT: 12 6
HIT DICE: % 4 (3 hp)
THACO: 20 20
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4 Special

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil Nil

 

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil Nil

SIZE: Small (1° tall) T (142' tall)
MORALE: Average (8-10) Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 15 15

Squeakers

It is believed that squeakers were created by a wizard spell
gone bad. These humanoids have disproportionately large
heads and spindly bodies. They look vaguely pixielike, but
they wear no clothes and display no gender.

Squeakers speak their own language and no other. Their
language consists of tiny grunts, squeaks, and whistles that
seem random to any but those listening through magic.

Combat: Squeakers attack only to annoy and aggravate their
prey. Their standard tactic is to stand several yards away and
throw stones, rocks, branches, etc., gaining a +2 attack bonus
due to their familiarity with such weapons. When chased they
lead the target into an ambush of the same nature. Squeakers
rarely stand in the open when attempting to annoy their tar-
gets, but use their missile weapons from behind cover.

Squeakers attack with no apparent strategy, aiming at those
who are closest to them. They do not concentrate on a single
adversary, seeking to bring it down, but spread their missiles
over a large area.

Habitat/Society: The squeakers have been encountered in every
corner of the globe; they do not appear to be affected by temper-
atures, although they shun more extreme climates. Squeakers
group together with no apparent leader and work together with
almost ant-like organization to irritate those who pass through
what they regard as their territory. This territory is usually no
larger than 1 mile ona side, but the squeakers patrol it vigi-
lantly and harass those who enter too far into it.

Ecology: Since squeakers don’t eat and do not appear to want
anything of any real value from the environment, they have
little impact on the local ecology. However, they reproduce
rapidly, replenishing numbers lost to marauding animals,
vengeful humanoids, and monsters.

 

 

 

 

Stwingers
These tiny humanoids are nauseatingly cute, They speak
pixie, brownie, elvish, dwarvish, and gnomish.

Combat: Stwingers do not fight; their sole purpose in life is to
have fun. The most fun one can have is to swing from a beard,
so dwarves are favored targets.

In “combat,” a stwinger exudes a pheromone that charms
all within a 40-foot radius (save vs. breath weapon to negate).
It then begins to swing from the beards and long hair of
charmed “playmates,” inflicting 1 point of damage every two
rounds from swinging too hard. If a character’s hit-point total
falls below 50% during the encounter, a second save is allowed
with a -4 penalty. Those who fail to save allow the faerie to
continue to swing until the victims reach 0 hp, at which time
they fall unconscious. Since stwingers can’t swing on a prone
body, victims never fall below 0 hp.

Those who wish to attack stwingers must first make suc-
cessful Charisma and Constitution checks. However, if they
only wish to extract the faeries from their hair, they need not
check. If a playmate’s companions attack a stwinger, it casts
mirror image (up to three times per day) and attempts to
escape. If the stwinger can be convinced that it is causing
harm, it will stop swinging from its playmate’s hair.

Habitat/Society: Once every three years, all stwingers gather
for a 10-day “Great Meet,” where they trade and choose
mates,

Stwingers can fly short distances, but only do so to leap
from one playmate to the next.

Ecology: Stwingers have no need for treasure. If a stwinger’s
“charm glands” are milked while it lives or within one hour of
its death, the extract can be used in a philter of love.

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate, arctic/ forest, hill
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary (or mated pair)
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: High (13-14)
TREASURE: Vx2,X

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1d2

ARMOR CLASS: 7

MOVEMENT: 14

HIT DICE: 2+4

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2 or | plus special

 

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4 (x2) or by weapon —1
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Control magical items
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: = 700

SIZE: M (4’ tall at shoulder)
MORALE: Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 975

Feystags are often whispered of in woodcutters’ tales, for their
mastery over magic makes them fearsome opponents. These
creatures can run on all fours or stand erect. Their limbs are
clawed, they have coats of dusty brown hair, and antlers rise
from their catlike heads.

Feystags can speak numerous languages as well as humans
of equal intelligence, particularly those of woodland creatures.

Combat: A feystag senses dweomers of enchanted items, and
it can often identify the type, specific functions, and even
“strength” (number of charges, uses, or spells remaining) of a
magical item with a 90% chance of success, modified as fol-
lows (choose the greatest applicable debit in any situation;
debits are not cumulative):

-60% if the feystag is confused or feebleminded
—40% if the feystag is under psionic attack

+20% if used on the feystag in the last three turns
+25% if the feystag has seen an item in use

A feystag free of confusion or feeblemindedness automati-
cally senses all dweomers within 60 feet, seeing them as auras
of differing brightness. A feystag that studies an item fora
round makes an Intelligence check to determine if it divines
how to activate or control a property of the item. (Some magi-
cal items defy identification or have too faint a dweomer for
the feystag to learn their powers—DM’s call.) Note that the
creature can study only one item per round, but it can do so in
addition to other physical, mental, and magical activity. A
feystag able to handle an item gains a 1-point bonus on its
ability check. Feystags can study items from up to 60 feet dis-
tant.

If a feystag learns how to operate an item power triggered
by force of will, silent mental command, or spoken word, it
can make the item function from 20 feet away. Feystags can’t

 

 

 

 

 

control or activate items they haven't identified, and they can
activate only one item per round, once, but items that operate
continuously for more than a round will do so even after an
activating feystag has turned its attention to another item.

The bearer of an item a feystag activates from afar can
wrest control back from the creature if the item is controlled by
physical means or if the bearer speaks command words. (The
bearer’s words override the feystag’s long-range commands.)
If the bearer tries to regain control of a power activated by
will, his Intelligence and Wisdom must exceed 32. If the total
is 29-32, the bearer succeeds, but must successfully save vs.
spell or be confused for 1d6 rounds (no one can operate the
item during this time if the bearer still holds it). If the total is
28 or less, the bearer can’t regain control from the feystag.

The feystag’s two clawed forearms can awkwardly wield
one-handed weapons (-1 penalty to attack and damage rolls)
or rake with its claws. It is immune to all enchantment/charm
and greater divination magic, and to psionics which duplicate
mind-reading and influencing effects.

Habitat/Society: A feystag is usually a solitary forager (except
during its mating cycle). It habitually scouts out new territo-
ries, discovering springs, caverns, hiding places, and areas
where pitfalls and snares can be set—often a feystag lair is sur-
rounded by traps. The creature hoards magical items, delight-
ing in their use and always trying to acquire more.

A few feystags dwell among humans in remote forest com-
munities. They often bargain with or sell information about
items brought to them, or they become sages.

Ecology: Feystags are preyed upon by all creatures who dine
on deer. They are friendly with korred, centaurs, and satyrs.
They prefer to eat plants (particularly mint), certain mosses,
and mistletoe.
Flameskull

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: — Any land
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary or small groups
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Nil

INTELLIGENCE: As in life (usually 8-16)
TREASURE: Any

ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil

NO. APPEARING: 1 (or, very rarely, 1d6)
ARMOR CLASS: 3

MOVEMENT: Fl 21(A)

HIT DICE: 4+4

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2 plus special
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2d4 (x2)

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spells

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Regeneration, spell immunity

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 88%

SIZE: S (about 1° diameter)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 2,000

Flameskulls are rare undead guardian creatures, These magi-
cally powered flying skulls are fashioned from human heads
soon after their owners’ deaths.

Flameskulls can speak Common and up to 14 other lan-
guages that they knew in life.

Combat: Flameskulls use their voices to lure intruders into
traps or deceive them about the presence of other dangers.
They can spew fire from their mouths twice per round, in
straight gouts up to 10 feet long.

If enchanted to do so at the time of their making, each can
also cast one spell per round, by verbal means only. Most
flameskulls cast magic missile or flame strike spells; none can
use mind-control spells. Most flameskulls can cast up to three
different spells, and almost all flameskulls cast their attack
spells every second round. On the rounds between, they utter
a single-segment, verbal-only incantation now lost to most
spellcasters: spell reflection, which returns any and all cast
spells reaching the flameskull in that round back on the
caster(s). If the spells inflict damage, the casters suffer normal
damage; if not, they are merely negated.

Flameskulls cannot be affected by mind-control spells like
charm person, or by sleep, hold, and other spells to which undead
are immune. Neither are they affected by cold, fire, or heat-
related magical attacks, or by electrical (lightning) attacks. Their
high magic resistance often protects them against spells they fail
to reflect back at their casters. Flameskulls are turned as liches
and may be struck by any sort of weapon.

These creatures regenerate 1 hp per round and reassemble
even after being shattered unless a dispel magic, exorcise, or
remove curse spell is cast on their remains, or the majority of
their bone fragments are doused with holy water.

Flameskulls fly about trailing little jets of flame. They move
in complete silence unless uttering spells or screaming for
effect.

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Flameskulls do not reproduce, nor have they
any purpose in life beyond the guardianship for which they
were created. Though they retain their intelligence, they often
go insane from sheer boredom and may, if the DM wishes,
exhibit erratic behavior. They always want to be entertained,
and if freed from their guardianship by the destruction or pil-
ferage of whatever they were set to guard, they do not hurl
themselves to attack to achieve their own destruction. Instead,
they try to follow or accompany the being(s) who freed them
from guardianship. Typically they float along, just out of
reach, making smart comments and wanting to see everything
interesting that is going on (including secret meetings, seduc-
tions, magical research, and other private matters).
Flameskulls are utterly lonely and act accordingly.

Ecology: Flameskulls fill no niche in the ecology. They are
studied by alchemists, priests, and wizards whenever possible
in an effort to duplicate their powers or the means of their
making (so far without reported success), or to find special
properties that their flames might possess.

 
 

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
  

Foulwing

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any land
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Flock

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil

NO. APPEARING: Id4

ARMOR CLASS: 3

MOVEMENT: 6, Fl 12(C)

HIT DICE: 6

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 5
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4+1 (x3) /1d4 (x2)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Ammonia breath, blood drain

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: H (16’-20° long, 40° wingspan)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 1,400

Foulwings are grotesquely misshapen flying predators
thought to have originated on another plane. Savage and wan-
tonly destructive, foulwings enjoy killing. Mildly empathic
and essentially lazy hunters, these clumsy fliers are often
tamed for use as steeds by evil and unscrupulous humans.

Foulwings have black leathery wings, toad-shaped bodies,
and vaguely horselike heads. The shapes of their heads, and
the location and size of the many horn-shaped wriggling skin
growths that cover their black bodies, vary from individual to
individual. Every foulwing has three needle-toothed jaws set
around its single-nostril snout. Glowing, faceted, red eyes give
the foulwing infravision with a 90-foot range.

Foulwings communicate with each other in harsh croak-
ings that communicate identities and basic emotions, urges,
and warnings.

Combat: The foulwing prefers to fight in the air or pounce on
its prey, allowing it the use of its wing claws and calling upon
the weight of its body to knock down and pin prey to the
ground. It twists its head so as to bite with all three jaws, and
its ammonium breath causes opponents (during the round of
contact and the following round) to suffer a—1 penalty to
attack rolls due to the stinging irritation it inflicts upon visual
and olfactory senses. If the foulwing disables or pins its prey
(a Strength score of 16 or higher is required to escape pinning
unaided; allow one Strength check per round), it attempts to
leisurely drain the victim’s blood by sucking with one of its
three hollow, tubelike tongues, biting open wounds to do so.
The blood drain is equal to 25 points of damage per round,
and pulling free inflicts another 2 points.

Habitat/Society: Foulwings may be found as solitary hunters
or in “flocks” that gather to court or attack especially strong
prey. Every flock (of up to four foulwings) is dominated by the
largest specimen and works together to scatter, disable, or
herd prey.

 

 

 

 

 

Ecology: Foulwings are rapacious scavengers that will eat car-
rion or plant leaves if no other food is available. They have
been known to keep “larders” of captive creatures to dine
upon later. Foulwings bear live young, typically 1-3 at a time,
and always nest in rocky, mountainous wilderness areas.
Young are born with 1 HD and only bite attacks (for 1d2 dam-
age per jaw), but rapidly grow to full size, whereupon the par-
ents abandon them and each other.

Foulwing flesh is heavy, oily, and foul in taste (hence the
creature’s name). It quickly rots upon the creature’s death and
has no known usefulness as armor or in magical practices.
Foulwing blood and saliva, however, have both been found to
be mildly caustic cleansers that bring metal to a bright, long-
lasting sheen.

Foulvern

In very rare instances, foulwings have mated with wyverns.
The offspring are always misshapen wyverns with 1-2 addi-
tional Hit Dice and three jaws each (as a foulwing has). Foul-
verns have a taste for blood and a savage enjoyment in killing,
but otherwise favor their wyvern heritage.
Gambado

i C

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: — Temperate and subtropical /
plains and subterranean

FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary or family

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Carnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)

TREASURE: R

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1d8

ARMOR CLASS: 6

MOVEMENT: See below

HIT DICE: 4

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d8/1d4 (x2)

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (6’ tall)
MORALE: Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 175

Known by the folk name of “springing skulls of doom,” these
creatures construct a lair and ambush passersby. Gambados
are completely amoral, caring only for their own survival,
their next meal, and their personal treasure.

Gambados are generally pale gray in color, but they often
camouflage themselves with soil and clays found in the course
of digging their pit lairs. These extraordinary-looking crea-
tures are man-sized, with a powerful human torso and two
arms that end in three curved claws. Supported on the strong,
flat neck is what appears to be the creature’s head, but is actu-
ally a skull of another creature. Gambados use found skulls to
house their heads, similar in principle to the hermit crab. They
have special muscles that secure the placement of the skull
and work its jaw. Skulls of horned, long-toothed, or other
interesting animals are favored by plains gambados, while
those with subterranean lairs prefer humanoid skulls.

A gambado’s torso narrows downward to a 3-foot-long
cylinder of cartilage and muscle that can be compressed
spring-style and suddenly released for lunging up and for-
ward. This columnar leg ends abruptly in three long and flat
single-toed feet. The gambado moves by springing. Jumping
vertically, it can just reach a 14-foot-high ceiling with its head,
and it leaps horizontally at a rate of 12. The radially arrayed
and retractable clawed feet allow the gambado to rapidly shift
direction or stop suddenly, having good traction.

Combat: A gambado normally attacks from its lair—a pit dug
some 6 feet deep—with its head just at ground level and its leg
contracted for springing. The monster constructs a cover for
its pit out of rock, wood, rags, and old bones, with only a small
hole in the center through which its skull head pokes out. An
approaching creature sees only the skull, apparently lying on
the ground. The cover will not support the weight of any crea-
ture larger than a rat, and it will not encumber the outward
spring of the gambado when it strikes.

er a

Ft
0 Lu 1 e,
ee PO oD . -

alah

a

 

 

 

Ai fi it od

within 4 feet of the skull head, the gambado springs out and
attacks, first biting with its ersatz head for 1d8 points of dam-
age. Thereafter it also attacks with its claws, each of which
inflicts 1d4 points of damage. The gambado will flee rather
than fight to the death.

Habitat/Society: If a gambado kills a victim, it ignores all
booty on the victim except coins, gems, and small pieces of
jewelry. These are compulsively sorted by type and color, fon-
dled and held up to light, then compulsively resorted. Finally,
the objects are taken into the pit and stored, although some are
scattered about or left on the ground in order to attract future
victims. The gambado eats its victim, then laboriously recon-
structs the cover for its lair, retreats into the pit to digest its
meal, and awaits further prey. Gambados can go for several
months between major meals. At least once every 10 days the
gambado uncovers its hoard to sort and admire the various
objects again.

Once thought to be solitary creatures, gambados are found
in groups too. If a location is successful in terms of food and
booty, a gambado will return to its former lair and collect its
family, which moves to the new area. In some places, as many
as eight gambado pits may be found in close proximity. Sages
believe that gambados communicate with one another through
a quiet strumming of the ground, using extremely rapid and
minute movements of their springing leg, although this may
be nothing more than a means of keeping the leg muscles exer-
cised and ready for action during long periods of waiting.

Ecology: The elastic hide of the gambado’s leg is sometimes
used for connectors in lengths of pipe or for similar applica-
tions. If recognized by someone who has dealt with gamba-
dos, a lair may serve to guard the rear of a passing party from
less intelligent wandering monsters.

 

 
 

 

Garbug

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Black Violet
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Swamp, jungle Swamps,
caverns

FREQUENCY: Rare Rare
ORGANIZATION: Pack Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night Any
DIET: Carnivore Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Animal (1) Animal (1)
TREASURE: Nil Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1d4+1 1
ARMOR CLASS: 5 5
MOVEMENT: 6, Fl 12(C) 6, Fl 9(D)
HIT DICE: 2+2 3+3
THACO: 19 17
NO. OF ATTACKS: 7 8
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4/1 (x6) 1d6 (x2)/

1 (x6)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Paralyzation, Paralyzation,

blood drain

rending
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil Nil
SIZE: M (6' long) L (9' long)
MORALE: Elite (15-16) Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 650 650

Garbugs are apparently related to carrion crawlers. They have
six tentacles around their mouths and insectoid wings on their
backs. In other respects they resemble lobsters, with eyestalks,
antennae, an exoskeleton, and five pairs of limbs with pincers.
The glossy black male has a long proboscis while the dominant
female is of a striking hue of violet, except for the set of strong
claws on her topmost pair of limbs, which are dark yellow.

Combat: Though garbugs readily eat carrion, they prefer liv-
ing (but immobile) prey. Their six 2-foot-long tentacles each
inflict 1 point of damage per hit and secrete a paralytic poison.
Victims must make a successful saving throw vs. paralyzation
for each such hit or be paralyzed for 2d6 rounds; simultaneous
hits are not cumulative. The paralytic poison is also mildly
corrosive, serving the garbug as a digestive aid. If not wiped
or rinsed off, it will cause a mild burning sensation and 1 point
of damage per turn over the next two hours.

A black garbug attacks with tentacles and proboscis. This
feeding tube inflicts 1d4 points of damage. If the garbug para-
lyzes his victim during a round in which he hits with his pro-
boscis, he leaves his proboscis inserted, draining blood for 1d4
damage per round. Black garbugs are very tenacious and often
fight to the death, even if they only want a light snack.

The violet garbug attacks with tentacles and strong claws.
Each claw inflicts 1d6 damage. If the violet garbug hits with
both claws in the same round, she also rends the victim for an
additional 1d4 points of damage. Once her victim is paralyzed
or dead, she uses her claws to tear off hunks of flesh, which
she transfers to her mouth, using her tentacles.

Except for the strong upper claws of the violet garbug, the
monster's pincers are too weak for combat. They are used sim-

 

 

 

 

 

ply to carry food or to hold the victim while feasting.

Habitat/Society: Black garbugs have no permanent lair, but
violet garbugs often claim a small cave or build a nest. Males
and females come together to mate once or twice per year, and
black garbugs use their proboscises to fight one another in
dazzling aerial combat, trying to win the privilege of mating
with a violet garbug. About a week after mating, the female
lays 20-40 eggs in standing water, which hatch into nymphs
that look like crayfish, but which are colored according to gen-
der. There are usually five or six males for every female. In
two months the nymphs undergo a metamorphosis and
acquire adult characteristics.

Predators, including and especially adult garbugs, keep the
numbers of developing garbugs small. Only 2d6 hatchlings
per nest reach maturity and go off to claim their own hunting
ranges. Garbugs seldom live longer than five years.

Ecology: Like carrion crawlers, garbugs perform a useful
function. Besides eliminating refuse, they also prey on weak
members of other species. Garbugs are also great enemies of
spiders and favor them as prey. Garbugs, particularly violets,
are very clever at luring spiders out of their lairs.

Incidental treasure, as well as the other remains of previous
victims, may be found anywhere in the creatures’ hunting
grounds. They aren't choosy about where they eat, and sel-
dom take victims away from where they have been killed.

Garbug tentacles are useful in the manufacture of paralysis
poisons, and they might be useful in the making of scrolls,
glyphs, or other items that cause paralysis.

If a female garbug is captured while still a nymph, she may
be raised as a guard animal. She can be trained to recognize a
few individuals and to follow very simple commands. A violet
garbug nymph brings as many as 1,000 gold pieces. Males, on
the other hand, have defied all attempts at training.
Genie, Tasked, General

 

 

Tasked genies may once have been genies of one of the four
elemental realms. However, they have performed a single type
of labor for so long that their forms have been permanently
sculpted to suit that work. Their profession defines them and
rules them, and a tasked genie taken away from its work
grows weak and sickly. Unlike most genies, the tasked are not
always uneasy or hostile in the presence of humans. They are
still very proud of their superior skills, but their sense of
worth is based on achievement, not birth. As long as they
share an interest and aptitude for their craft, and a willingness
to defer to the genies’ greater knowledge, humans can consort
with tasked genies with no ill effect.

Tasked genies are elemental spirits that serve the unsympa-
thetic forces of nature. They are free-willed, civilized, and
highly intelligent. They eat, drink and reproduce just like
humans, and they can die as well. Yet their powers inspire
such fear and awe in the minds of primitive tribesmen that
they are still worshiped and offered sacrifices in remote and
savage areas. They can raise buildings overnight, their armies
can appear and disappear from the field of battle, and their
magic can whisk a person hundreds of miles in moments.

Most genies prefer to dwell apart from humans, but tasked
genies are equally at home in the wilderness and in the cities.
Genies that live on the elemental planes rarely come to the
Prime Material Plane unless called, but tasked genies often
live in wildernesses, ruins, deserted houses, cemeteries, rivers,
and abandoned wells. Trespassers on the territory of a genie
are usually warned off by an attempt to frighten; stones are
thrown at the intruders by invisible genies or sudden sand-
storms spring up to blind, confuse, and misdirect. If the tres-
passing continues, the travelers are attacked and shown no
mercy.

A very few tasked genies are nomads of a sort. Their camps
in the desert, among the ruins, and their lodgings in the cities
may disappear in an instant (usually at dawn or dusk), when-
ever they decide to move on. But their camps don’t resemble
the camps of nomads; they are often huge mansions or
fortresses that may vanish into the sands when discovered,
like a dream fading in the morning light. At other times, how-
ever, genies in the wilderness take their discovery by others
rather badly, and, instead of moving on, they try to force their
discoverers away by throwing stones at them or by carrying
them on the wind for many miles. Hence, travelers through
the desert often call out to the genies when approaching deso-
late lands and ask for permission to pass through.

Unlike the genies of the four elements, tasked genies have
very little regard for castes, classes, and social distinctions of
humans, as their lives and their status among their kind are
almost entirely dependent on merit. Tasked genies have no
nobility, only masters of their craft. They will as soon work for
a pauper as for a sultan, as long as there is work to be done.

This lack of elitism does not mean that genies don’t under-
stand the nuances of politeness and proper etiquette. They
may not think much of their master, but they will be unstint-
ingly polite. Of course, genies can and do turn social conven-
tions “topsy-turvy” when they are free to harass someone who
has offended them, or even when the mood just strikes them.

Tasked genies fall into two main categories: those bound by
their profession to a certain location, and those kept inactive in
some way for long periods between bouts of servitude. The
first group comprises the helpful tasked genies, those who cre-
ate fantastic foods, art, and monuments. The second group has
nothing to do when not called upon by genie nobles or power-
ful wizards; they are slowly driven insane by their magical
isolation, and for this reason they delight in shedding blood
when released from service. These include the deceiver, slayer,
and guardian genies (only the tasked deceiver genie is
included in this particular collection of monsters).

Tasked genies must always be either paid or enslaved
before they will render service to a nongenie. Binding a partic-
ular tasked genie is a difficult undertaking requiring great
wealth, wisdom, and patience. The procedure is equivalent to
spell research, with the same costs and chances of success.
Only a wizard may successfully learn the rituals for binding a
tasked genie. The determination of success is made with the
level of the researched spell treated as equal to the tasked
genie’s Hit Dice divided in half (round up). Thus, learning to
bind an administrator tasked genie requires as much effort as
learning a 3rd-level spell, while the ritual for commanding a
deceiver tasked genie will be discovered as if it were a 5th-
level spell.

Though only a single genie may be bound by a spell, some
tasked genies will request aid from their brethren when com-
manded to undertake a large, short-term project for their mas-
ters such as shearing a huge herd of sheep or building
fortifications in time to hold off invaders. These genie helpers
serve without demanding pay from the wizard so as to free
their cousin from service more quickly. A wizard may bind no
more than one tasked genie per year or face the wrath of the
genie princes.

All tasked genies are extremely long-lived, but tasked
genies kept from their tasks invariably live short lives.

Genies occasionally take human lovers, but the result is
almost always tragic. Those who love the genies lose all sense
of reason and judgment and are often destroyed by their love
for such a powerful spirit. Occasionally, however, the pair
makes its peace and lives happily, almost always after a
stormy courtship and only after leaving human society. These
liaisons rarely produce children, but when they do the off-
spring have the powers, strength, and abilities of markeen (see
the AL-QaDIM® MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM® appendix), though
they do not have a human double.
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Dependent upon task
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary of family
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Genius (17-18)
TREASURE: E,G
ALIGNMENT: Any lawful

NO. APPEARING: 1 or 1d4+1
ARMOR CLASS: 6

MOVEMENT: 9, Sw 15 or Fl 15(A)
HIT DICE: 6

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2d8

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (7' tall)
MORALE: Average (8-10)
XP VALUE: 2,000

Tasked administrator genies serve in bureaucracies, both for
other genies and for humans, acting as advisors, negotiators,
and all-around bureaucrats, and they often act for their mas-
ters in day-to-day decision making.

Administrators are tall, noble, and pleasing to the eye.
They prefer to dress in flowing silks that highlight their fine
musculature, but they wear appropriate clothing for their
duties. Their skin color is dark tan with a slight bluish cast.

These genies retain limited telepathy and can communicate
with creatures of at least low intelligence. They can either fly
or swim, depending on whether they were once djinn or
marids. Administrators seldom use their special movement
for transportation, preferring to save it for times of emergency.

Combat: An administrator genie can cast friends, tongues, and
ESP, each three times per day. It can use suggestion once per
day, and it has a permanent unseen servant. Spellcasting is per-
formed as a 10th-level wizard.

Though administrators prefer not to enter combat them-
selves, they are adept at handling logistics, determining where
supplies come from and how to get them where they’re
needed. If forced into melee, a tasked administrator is sure to
have the one normal or magical item that will help the most,
provided that item is one owned by the genie or may be found
normally in its place of residence.

Habitat/Society: Administrator genies are very proud of their
work, considering bureaucracy an honorable profession with
many benefits. They serve in many capacities, from clerk to
city manager, but they are almost always ambitious and try to
rise to positions of power. They prefer behind-the-scenes
power however, and try to stay out of the public eye.

A tasked administrator is often part of a family of like
genies who sometimes serve together in especially large
bureaucracies. Those administrator genies who work alone

Genie, Tasked, Administrator

* . te

 

 

 

 

 

can always call on their other family members for favors, and
there seems to be an extensive under-the-table trade between
them. Rumors state that there are only two families of tasked
administrators, one formerly djinn, the other formerly marids.
Since they seem to know many other tasked administrators
(and constantly refer to their cousin or brother or uncle who
can help in a given situation), the rumors may be true. There
seems to be a rivalry between the djinni and marid families.

Since most tasked administrators consider their duties a
normal job, they expect to be well paid, and they make efforts
to gather riches to pass on to their family. When they reach a
level at which they feel they can retire, they often try to pass
their jobs on to offspring, or at least other family members.

Administrators are quite skilled at their duties. As with any
job, however, there is a period of training, and young tasked
administrators may be inefficient or appear habitually fraz-
zled. If given a chance, though, they almost always settle into
a routine. Those who remain inefficient act as assistants to
other tasked administrators or are assigned by the family to
rulers who have somehow offended the family.

If tasked administrator genies are bound into servitude,
they often become surly and obstinate. Though they follow
their orders, they are slow to process paperwork, rude to out-
siders, and lackadaisical in giving orders to lesser bureaucrats.

When a tasked administrator has attained an important
position, it often demands fine quarters. Former djinn prefer
open, airy quarters, while former marids like many fountains
and pools. Administrators will also try to incorporate these
elements into their place of work.

Ecology: Administrator genies can be great hindrances or
great helps to any bureaucracy. If treated well by the local
ruler, they can make the bureaucracy a shining example of effi-
ciency. If not, they can turn a city into a shamble of errors and
problems.
Genie, Tasked, Deceiver

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Dependent upon task
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: High (13-14)
TREASURE: FU
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil
NO, APPEARING: 1-2

ARMOR CLASS: 0 (4)
MOVEMENT: 12, Fl 18(A)
HIT DICE: u

THACO: 11

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2d10
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spells, blinding
SPECIAL DEFENSES: __ Displacement
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 35%

SIZE: M (7° tall)
MORALE: Unsteady (5-7)
XP VALUE: 10,000

Deceiver genies are servants of noble djinn and sometimes the
most powerful of jann. They themselves are djinn perverted to
a life of deception, sworn to mask the face of the world. Their
true form is difficult to judge, but they are said to be tall and
gaunt, with thin arms and legs, and large heads, hands, and
feet. They have long fingers, blond hair, and striking eyes—
one blue, one brown. Their skin is a mottled gray.

Combat: Deceiver genies are cowards shrouded in a perpetual
displacement effect, so the first attack on a deceiver genie
always misses. However, creatures able to see through this
illusion can attack them at their natural Armor Class of 4.
These genies can use each of the following spell-like abili-
ties at will: change self, delude, false vision, tongues, misdirection,
undetectable lie, and whispering wind. Twice per day they can
create distance distortion, massmorph, spectral force, and shadow
magic. Once per day they can invoke disbelief, projected image,
solipsism, and sundazzle. Once per week they can use a mass
suggestion (up to 24 levels or HD of creatures) or create a per-
manent illusion, programmed illusion, or veil. Their illusions are
equivalent to those cast by a 24th-level caster for purposes of
dispel magic, duration, area of effect, and so on. However, their
life of trickery renders them susceptible to their own game;
deceiver genies save against illusion/phantasm magic at +4.
Favorite tricks of deceiver genies include sending hapless
victims over illusory bridges, chasing illusory oases, or even
making them argue with one another over trivial matters.
They also enjoy sending unnerving messages to sentries, cara-
van guards, and other watchmen. They have the minds of
immature pranksters, and no trick is too low or too difficult.
Deceiver genies will gladly give up food, sleep, and treasure
in pursuit of a truly cruel scheme. The only trick they dislike is
taking the place of others; although they can alter their out-
ward appearance, they are uncomfortable being near others
for more than a few minutes. They pretend to be someone else

 

 

 

 

only when a larger plot requires it.

If forced into melee, deceiver genies fight with a hysterical,
terrified strength. On a natural roll of 20, their steel nails tear
out an opponent's eye. If the roll of 20 is 4 more than the genie
needs to hit its target, both eyes are torn out. In either case, an
immediate system shock roll is required to avoid passing out
for 1d6 turns from the pain. Partially blinded foes strike at -2,
and fully blinded opponents suffer a —4 penalty to all attack
rolls, and all rules for blind-fighting apply. In most cases,
deceiver genies call up spectral minions to serve them in bat-
tle. These are often reinforced by real minions of the same
type; deceiver genies think the resulting chaos is hilarious.

Habitat/Society: Though most deceiver genies serve other
genies, they sometimes cooperate with others of their kind to
build themselves a village and hide it in remote regions. They
rarely speak the truth, even under magical duress—a deceiver
genie under the influence of a charm monster spell or similar
magic still lies constantly and shamelessly to its friends.

These genies are dangerous to their masters when not con-
stantly set to a task; when idle, they spin webs of lies, gener-
ally to provoke their masters into some disastrous action.
Deceiver genies see the entire world as a fiction, a game, or a
toy created for their manipulation and amusement.

Deceiver genies aren't very interested in wealth, but they're
great fans of the arts, which they consider a formal but fasci-
nating form of lying. They will never harm a storyteller or
tasked artist genie, though they may still confuse them.

Anyone wishing to bind such a genie must always be on
guard for its effects on and promises to one’s servants, cohorts,
and loved ones, as loyalty to a master does not include loyalty
to a master’s retainers in the code of a deceiver genie.

Ecology: Tasked deceivers eat, drink, and sleep as humans do.
 

 

Genie, Tasked, Harim Servant

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Dependent upon task
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: High (13-14)
TREASURE: W

ALIGNMENT: Lawful neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 4

MOVEMENT: phe.

HIT DICE: 7

THACO: i3

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d10 (x2) or by weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: = 10%

SIZE: L (8" tall)
MORALE: Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: 1,400

Harim servant genies serve many purposes. They guard the
women of a harim, but also entertain them and perform minor
tasks around the harim area. Most harim servants are males,
tall and muscular, but not especially handsome. They dress in
well-made clothing of fine fabric, yet of simple design.

Tasked harim servants are desired by many harim owners,
including other genies. When they work for other genies, they
tend to be less protectors and guardians, and more menial ser-
vants, so most enjoy working for “lesser beings,” because it
builds their own importance.

Combat: Tasked harim servants can cast each of the following
spells three times per day: cantrip, control temperature 10°
radius, mending, minor creation, and major creation. They can cast
alarm and create food and water once per day. They cast as if they
are 9th-level wizards or priests, and they use their spells to
protect, entertain, and serve the women of the harim.

Tasked harim servants are also versed in melee combat.
They normally carry two weapons, often a pair of great scimi-
tars—due to their size, strength, and skill, they have no prob-
lem wielding both weapons at the same time. Without
weapons, tasked harim servants attack with their fists.

Habitat/Society: Harim servants act almost in a fatherly man-
ner toward their charges, seeking to guide, protect, and help.
Female harim servants are strong matrons who seek to bring
order to the harim. Both genders demand respect and do not
hesitate to punish unruliness, though they generally try to
combat problems by offering caring and a sense of family.

The genies take care of all the needs of the women, from
mending and cooking to guarding and footbathing. They use
cantrip liberally for cleaning and entertainment, using other
spells as necessary to increase the comfort of the harim. They
have nonweapon proficiencies in healing, sewing, cooking,
and local and ancient history. The genies also serve as story-

 

 

 

 

 

tellers, entertaining with legends, tales of genies, and amusing
jokes. Some tasked harim servants have other skills, such as
singing or dancing, which they can teach to the harim women.

Harim servants demand little pay, receiving gratification
from doing a good job and the adoration of their “daughters.”
Though they answer to the harim’s master, the genies tend to
develop an emotional attachment to the members of the
harim. If any of their requirements aren't met, or if they’re
bound to service, they twist their duties toward other pur-
poses. They become less servants to the harim masters and
more servants to the harim members. While the genies follow
the letter of the masters’ orders, they seek to avoid the spirit.
In some rare instances, a genie might aid a woman to escape
or to pursue an affair, or it might even become a paramour
itself, but the offense to the genie or his charges must be great
before actions like these are taken.

Other genies do not approach the women of a harim pro-
tected by a tasked genie unless the harim servant genie
chooses to allow them access (for example, if the harim master
is cruel, and the tasked genie knows another genie who will
help and protect one of the harim women).

There are a few tasked genies devoted to looking after the
men of a selama. They have similar attitudes to harim ser-
vants, wishing the best for their charges and for the whole
selama.

Tasked harim servants get along well with most “lesser
races,” particularly women. Since they are so attuned to the
needs of the harim, they can often empathize with women
they encounter outside the harim. If asked for advice, how-
ever, they tend to suggest clothing and actions more suited to
a harim girl than to an adventurer or merchant, and they often
try to pamper and guide women they meet.

A tasked harim servant goes insane if its harim is taken
away or severely harmed.
Genie, Tasked, Messenger

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Dependent upon task
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: High
TREASURE: U
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1-2

ARMOR CLASS: 5
MOVEMENT: 15, Fl 42(A)
HIT DICE: 3

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: I
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d8 or by weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spells
SPECIAL DEFENSES: — See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Standard

SIZE: S (4' tall)
MORALE: Unsteady (5-7)
XP VALUE: 420

Messenger genies were once djinn, but now serve all genies
equally, flitting from plane to plane bearing messages, gifts,
treaties, letters, documents, and love letters between noble
genies of the various realms.

Messenger genies are slim, fluid creatures that never stop
moving. They wear close fitting clothes and keep their hair
cropped short under their tight turbans. They never wear jew-
elry and are always lightly armed. They often ride magical
mounts, though they can also travel quickly on foot.

Combat: Messenger genies would rather flee than fight, and
would rather die than surrender their documents. They
always try to slip through crowds, duck behind trees, or hide
under tables rather than standing and confronting their foes.
When forced into combat, messenger genies move quickly,
with a -1 bonus to initiative rolls. They attack with thrown
weapons like darts and use an enchanted poison unique to the
messenger genies, called bardan rugad (cold sleep).

Bardan rugad is used to deliver messages to dangerous or
unpredictable recipients, and it can be used as either an
injected or ingested poison. A creature that fails a saving
throw vs. poison at a —4 penalty is paralyzed instantly but
remains unnaturally alert for 1d6 + 4 rounds, giving the genie
time to deliver his message. After this time, the creature falls
into a deep sleep. This slumber lasts for 1d6 hours, allowing
the messenger genie time to escape. The recipient's skin is cold
to the touch throughout this time, and some are mistakenly
pronounced dead. Bardan rugad even affects undead, though
they save against its effects with just a —-2 penalty.

Messenger genies can use each of the following spell-like
abilities, once per day, as a 9th-level spellcaster: aura of com-
fort", clear path*, lighten load*, dimensional folding*, invisibility,
haste, distance distortion, and shadow door. (Spells marked with
an asterisk are from the Tome of Magic and can be replaced by
dimension door, Leomund’s tiny hut, pass without trace, and

 

 

 

 

 

strength.)

Dying messenger genies can send their spirits out on the
wind, reaching the nearest intelligent creature and asking to
be avenged. Genies within range will always respond.

Habitat/Society: Messenger genies are always moving. They
cannot stand to be kept waiting and are prone to pacing, fin-
gertapping, and other nervous habits. Being tied up or held
still is a form of torture that can sometimes (10%) force a mes-
senger genie to undertake a mission for creatures to which a
messenger genie owes no service. Only magical compulsion
can force a messenger genie to reveal its messages; it would
rather die than reveal documents held in trust.

Messenger genies are loquacious and enjoy helping people
they meet on the road. If they are treated rudely, they may
cripple mounts or ruin footwear.

Messenger genies think that motion in itself represents
progress and goodwill; slow or immobile creatures must be
either evil, lazy, or corrupt. Messengers are always up first in
the morning and are the last to rest in the evening. They are
not childishly energetic, but they are fiercely determined to do
and see as much as possible, for they live only 10 to 15 years.

Ecology: Tasked messengers are respected by all genies.
Though they are individually weak and rarely found in num-
bers, they are sheltered and protected by noble genies. Anyone
assaulting a messenger genie can be sentenced to 100 years of
servitude to the genies. Anyone stealing from one is put to
death.

Messenger genies need very little food and water, and can
work for 40 days without rest. After 40 days, they seek out a
cloud castle or mountaintop and collapse into a week-long
coma in a den of cloudstuff. When they awaken, they are fully
restored, ready to run for another 40 busy days.

 
 

 

Genie, Tasked, Miner

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Dependent upon task
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day
DIET: Petrivore
INTELLIGENCE: High
TREASURE: Q (x10)
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1d6
ARMOR CLASS: 0
MOVEMENT: 15

HIT DICE: 6
THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 3d6 (x2)

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spells

 

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: L (8° tall)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 1,400

Miner genies are a recent form of tasked genie, employed by
the dao, though they were apparently created by evil wizards.
Miner genies were once dao, but they have been compelled to
work in mine shafts for so long that now they are hulking, dri-
ven creatures that live only to dig and carry stone.

Miner genies are as wide as they are tall; their height has
been reduced so that they fit through narrow tunnels more
easily. Their arms and legs are thick and powerful, and their
hands end in digging claws so exaggerated that miner genies
can no longer use their hands to eat; they must feed using
their tiny snouts, like animals. Their heads are bullet shaped,
and they are entirely hairless.

Combat: Miner genies steadily tear through stone with their
claws. In fact, their claws grow so quickly that, if they stop
mining for more than a week, their claws become ingrown,
crippling the miner genie. They cannot use weapons.

Miner genies can cast detect metal or mineral, dig, faerie fire,
and water breathing (for diving through flooded mine shafts)
once per day. Like dao, they can assume a dusty gaseous form
once per day, which they use to scout along cracks and seams
in the rock. They can usually detect poisonous gases and
unstable mine shafts (75%). No stone weapon can harm them.

Miner genies can collapse any mine shaft they have person-
ally dug with a single blow, inflicting 6d10 points of damage
upon anyone within the area of collapse who does not make a
successful saving throw vs. death magic. The collapsing sec-
tion can be up to 1,500 square feet. Those who make their sav-
ing throw suffer only 1d10 points of damage from rock shards
and rebounding debris. Miner genies are immune to the
effects of these collapses.

Habitat/Society: Miner genies prefer dim light and dusty
mines, where no genie or slave can see the dishonorable state
to which they have been reduced. They are a universally grim,

 

 

 

 

 

self-pitying lot, prone to fits of sudden rage. They are solitary
throughout their entire lives. Miner genies do not congregate
for any reason and will strive to avoid each other’s company.

Miner genies never mate or bear children because they do
not want to bring others into the harsh servitude of the wiz-
ards that made them. However, their own lack of children
makes them remarkably kind and gentle around the children
of the dao, and they are occasionally allowed to serve as
guardians for the illegitimate children of noble dao. These
children are raised in the dim and despairing world of the
miner genies until the dao parents think it is safe to declare
their true parentage. A few of these children have been known
to become miner genies, themselves, if left too long among the
tasked genies.

Ecology: Miner genies eat stone, so just by living they mine
out tunnels.

These genies that individually they're too weak to kill who
wizards bred them, but as they are not always magically
bound to serve the wizards, there is always the chance that
they might revolt and kill their masters. Although they know
that the dao are helpless against the cruel mages, the miners
are irrationally angry that the dao do nothing to save them.

Miner genies are smaller and more manageable than the
impudent dao, and some malicious wizards have suggested
that all dao should be transformed into miner genies, so that
they will always be servile. The dao might find miner genies
amusing if the latter had been formed from some slave race,
but as their blood brothers, many dao feel that miner genies
are an abomination which should be done away with as soon
as the yoke of their wizard masters is lifted.
Genie, Tasked, Oathbinder

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Dependent upon task
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Order

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: Cre
ALIGNMENT: Lawful neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: -]

MOVEMENT: 15, Fl 30(B)

HIT DICE: 12

THACOD: 9

NO. OF ATTACKS: |
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 4d6 plus special
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spells

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Immune to victims’ attacks
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 45%

SIZE: L (9’ tall)
MORALE: Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: 12,000

Oathbinder genies are reshaped efreet devoted to maintaining
solemn oaths sworn between their masters and any consenting
sentient being. If these oaths are broken, the oathbinder genie
punishes the oathbreaker according to the terms of the vow.

Oathbinder genies have skin as black and glossy as obsid-
ian, and their bodies have a perpetual! nimbus of white fire.
Their eyes shine with purple fire.

Oathbinder genies speak the language of the efreet.

Combat: Tasked oathbinder genies are seen only when they are
summoned by the magical ceremonial oath that they enforce,
and they are summoned only when an oath that the genie over-
sees is broken, or if the magical oath is dispelled. If an oath is
broken, the genie is magically transported to the offender's
location within 1d3 rounds. A dispel magic spell may be
attempted to negate the oath’s binding magic at that point; it is
negated if the spell is successful vs. 12th-level magic.

Even if the binding is broken, the eathbinder genie appears
in order to discover why the magic has been dispelled, and it
will attack if, in its considered opinion, the oath should still be
binding. If the conditions of the oath no longer apply to the
reality of the situation, then the genie’s guardianship is with-
drawn and the binding oath is void without consequences to
anyone (for instance, if the oath applied only to members of a
given tribe, and the person seeking release from the oath has
become an outcast of that tribe).

Oathbinder genies attack by projecting a stream of white
fire from their hands, somewhat like a burning hands spell, but
each hand burns independently. The genie can attack one crea-
ture with each hand, inflicting 4d6 points of damage. The
range of the stream is 8 feet.

An oathbinder genie is completely immune to all physical
and magical attacks from a creature whose oath it oversees.
An oathbreaker slain by this tasked genie immediately
assumes the form of a ghost (see the MONSTROUS MANUAL

 

 

 

 

 

tome). The spirit form of a victim is captured and weakened
for months or even years by the genie, and during that time
the victim can neither be contacted with a speak with dead spell
nor raised from the dead. Victims’ spirits are held for one
month per level of the victim, and then allowed to rest in
peace. Resurrection and reincarnation are effective restorative
spells when used at any point during which they would nor-
mally work, however.

An oathbinder genie has a number of spell-like abilities
that aid it in the performance of its duties. It can use each of
the following abilities, three times per day, as a 12th-level
caster: command, evil eye, greater malison, hold person, Otiluke’s
resilient sphere, unluck, and wall of force.

Habitat/Society: Oathbinder genies are all members of an
order that governs their conduct. They are experts on all
aspects of contracts, oaths, vows, and matters of obligation,
and they are always glad to debate fine points or split hairs
with anyone similarly inclined, regardless of the topic.

Oathbinders refuse to serve the marid, whose word can
rarely be counted on.

Ecology: Oathbinder genies have little impact on most crea-
tures, as their needs are simple and they are never encoun-
tered other than as the servants of some powerful genie lord
or wizard. Genies never break the word they give an oath-
binder genie, although they may bend, twist, and wriggle or
talk their way out.

Oathbinder genies demand more for their services (trea-
sure, respect, goods) when the conditions of the oaths they
oversee are more strict or exacting. Oaths of fealty sworn for a
lifetime are more demanding to enforce than promises of
nonaggression made for the coming year. All oaths of the lat-
ter sort cost a minimum of 1,000 gp to establish, and may fre-
quently be tens or hundreds of times more expensive.

 

 
 

  

Gibbering Mouther

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Swamps, underground
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day
DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Semi (2-4)
TREASURE:
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1
ARMOR CLASS: 1
MOVEMENT: 3, Sw 6
HIT DICE: 443
THACO: 17
NO. OF ATTACKS: 6+
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1 (x6) plus special
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Gibbering, spit, bite
SPECIAL DEFENSES: — Ground control
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil
SIZE: M (4’-7* tall)
MORALE Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 4 HD—975

8 HD—2,000

The gibbering mouther is an amoeboid form of life composed
entirely of mouths and eyes. With its eyes and mouths closed,
it appears to be a lump of earthy material, surprising creatures
that stumble across it. Its only motive is to eat whatever is edi-
ble and within reach, be it animal, vegetable, or mineral.

Gibbering mouthers move by oozing forward, fastening
several mouths to the ground and pulling themselves along. A
mouther may move faster over fluid and viscous terrain, such
as mud and quicksand, by swimming.

Combat: The brain of a mouther is located in its midportion,
and its gelatinous body makes it difficult to strike this spot,
hence its relatively low Armor Class.

The mouther attacks in three ways: gibbering, spitting, and
biting. When any edible object is sighted by a mouther, it
begins gibbering incoherently, causing confusion among all
within a 60-foot radius who fails a saving throw vs. spell. Each
character who fails must immediately roll 1d8 to determine
which of the following effects occurs. On a roll of 1, the victim
wanders aimlessly for one round; on a roll of 2-5, the victim
stands motionless, stunned for one round; on a roll of 6-7, the
victim attacks the nearest living creature for one round; and
on a roll of 8, the victim runs in fear for two rounds.

The spittle of a gibbering mouther bursts into a bright flare
if it strikes any hard surface. The resulting flash blinds charac-
ters looking at it if they fail to save vs. petrification—the blind-
ness lasts 1d3 rounds, The mouther may then attempt to bite
blinded opponents with a +2 bonus to its attack rolls. Blinded
victims attack with a +4 penalty.

A mouther attacks by biting with six mouths per round.
Each attack roll exceeding the number required to hit by 2 or
more indicates that the mouth attaches to the victim and
drains an additional point per round. When three or more
mouths are attached to a single victim, that character must
make a successful Dexterity check each round thereafter or

 

 

 

 

 

slip and fall. The mouther will then flow over the victim and
bite with 12 mouths, gaining a +4 bonus to strike its prone
opponent. Once it pulls down one victim, a mouther tries to
trap another.

If a victim reaches 0 hit points, he is absorbed into the
mouther, giving it another mouth and pair of eyes, as well as 1
hit point permanently, up to the maximum for its Hit Dice.
Only living flesh can be absorbed like this.

A mouther liquefies the ground and stone within a 5-foot
radius and controls the consistency of the material, changing it
to doughy quicksand. It requires 30 seconds to alter earth to
quicksand, and a full round to mutate stone to earth.

Habitat/Society: Like other amoeboid life forms, gibbering
mouthers reproduce by asexual fission. When a mouther has
absorbed enough victims to gain maximum hit points, it splits
in two. Each mouther has 4 + 3 Hit Dice (one has 17 hit points,
the other has 18). The mouther retreats to some small, dark
den before the four-hour process begins. When the two new
mouthers recover from the dividing process (which takes 7 +
3d12 turns), each seeks its own new territory.

Gibbering mouthers avoid each other’s territories and even
physical contact with one another. It’s believed that bringing
two mouthers in physical contact forces them to merge, creat-
ing a larger creature with twice the size, HD, and number of
attacks, but half the already-slow movement of the parent
monsters. These great beasts strip the land so thoroughly that
they generally die of starvation as soon as prey becomes
scarce.

Ecology: Gibbering mouthers are unnatural creatures, usually
created by foul sorcery and kept as guards by mages or
obscene cults. Although they can survive in the wild, they are
more scavengers than hunters, and they rarely establish repro-
ducing populations in any but the most lush swamps.
Gnasher

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Normal Winged

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Forest/hills Forest/ hills
FREQUENCY: Uncommon Rare
ORGANIZATION: Pack Pack
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day Day
DIET: Carnivore Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Semi (2—4) Low (5-7)
TREASURE: None None
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 2d10 2d6
ARMOR CLASS: 6b 5
MOVEMENT: 15 12, Fl 6(E)
HIT DICE: 3 4
THACO: 15 15
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 l
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d6 1d8s
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil Surprise
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil Nil
SIZE: M (5’-7" long) L (8’"-10° long)
MORALE: Elite (13-14) Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 120 270

Leader 175 650

These creatures resemble dogs, but their snouts sport many
more razor-sharp teeth, and a bristly tuft of hair grows
between their shoulders. Coloration tends toward deeper
blacks, grays, and browns. Their eyes burn with a desire to
kill.

The pack communicates on a rudimentary level, using a
combination of barks, growls, and body language.

Combat: When gnashers attack, they circle their prey and then
go for the throat. They prefer to make jabbing attacks, circling
and feigning until they have sufficiently weakened their prey.
Then they all lunge at once, overbearing the prey from all
directions. The prone victim’s AC is reduced by 4 and the
gnashers inflict an additional +2 points of damage per attack.

The only hope of escaping a gnasher pack is to climb some-
thing the gnashers cannot ascend. However, they have been
known to stand guard until the prey dies of dehydration or
attempts an escape.

Habitat/Society: Gnashers hunt in packs, following a leader
(+1 HD) that has earned its place by fighting for dominance,
though rarely to the death. They frequently squabble among
themselves, fighting over food, pack dominance, and mates,
but not if there are foes present. They only kill gnashers of
other packs, as these are viewed as competitors.

Gnashers avoid populated areas when possible, mostly
attacking those who wander into the wilderness, although at
times smaller farming communities have trouble with packs of
gnashers that kill livestock and lone villagers.

Ecology: Gnashers survive solely on meat. They attack nearly
anything in the area, from rabbits to adventurers to low-flying
birds. An area controlled by these creatures will be devoid of
other animal life. Anyone entering the territory of a pack of

 

 

 

 

gnashers will notice an eerie silence in the area. It takes nearly
a year for any animals to return to an area that gnashers have
made their home, even after they leave it behind.

Gnashers mate in the spring, the female bearing 1d4 + 1
cubs that stay her for one year and then are forced out on their
own.

This monster’s natural enemy is the elf dog, the cooshee.
The two species hate each other and will attack at first sight.

Winged Gnasher

These cousins of normal gnashers are encountered only in
areas with natural outcroppings of stone. They have batlike
wings—thick membranes attached to their forelegs and run-
ning the length of their bodies—that enable them to leap into
the air from these outcroppings and glide for distances of 50
feet for every 10 feet of height from which they leaped. How-
ever, their wings tire easily, and they cannot maintain glides of
over 200 feet. They can also leap into the air from the ground
and glide for 20 feet, but they suffer a —2 attack penalty
attempting to bring down a target from such a jump.

Combat: Winged gnashers can “fly” at prey, folding their
wings and dropping down from heights of up to 20 feet to
achieve surprise. This is equivalent to a charge attack, giving
the winged gnasher a +2 attack bonus (but a-1 AC penalty).

Habitat/Society: Winged gnashers hardly ever sleep in the
open. Their nests within caves are crude collections of straw
and branches in which they sleep. There is usually very little
treasure in a gnasher cave, since they have no use for it. They
generally leave it on the carcasses of the creatures they kill.

Ecology: Winged gnashers are the natural enemies of most
other aerial monsters, especially griffons and hippogriffs, who
put aside their differences in order to eliminate gnasher packs.

 
 

 

Golem, Brain

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Subterranean
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 5
MOVEMENT: 6

HIT DICE: 12 (60 hp)
THACO: 9

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2d12
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Mental blast
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Spell immunities, +2 weapon to hit

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 70%

SIZE: L (8' tall, 5° wide)
MORALE Fearless (20)
XP VALUE 10,000

A creation of the ancient race of mind flayers, brain golems
may be the most horrible of all their kind. They exist purely
for the desires of illithids and are unswayed from their goals.

A brain golem appears as a huge, burly humanoid with an
oversized brain for a head. In fact, the whole body is made up
of brain tissue, but is covered with a thin film of slimy skin.

Although brain golems are more intelligent than other
golems, they are completely unable to communicate.

Combat: Brain golems are used as muscle or guards for
illithids, and they attack an opponent only if so ordered or if
the opponent tries to get at what the brain golem is guarding.
Regardless of the situation, brain golems never attack mind
flayers, which limits their effectiveness in battles between
members of that race.

In combat, brain golems are more aware of their environ-
ment than other golems. They always aim for wizards first,
knowing that a quick strike could easily kill a member of that
physically weak class. They seem to have an innate ability to
roughly determine an opponent's condition (i.e., hit points), so
they can continue to aim for the next weakest character after
defeating a wizard.

A brain golem’s physical attack is a swift punch with its
fist. It is unable to employ both fists in a round because of its
singular thought pattern, but the one fist is often good
enough. In addition, once per turn, a brain golem can release a
form of the mind flayer’s mental blast. This energy strikes
everyone within 60 feet. All those hit must make successful
saving throws vs. spell or suffer 2d8 points of damage and
become stunned for 1d10 rounds. Those who do save only lose
initiative for the next round and suffer 1d8 damage. The
golem generally calls upon this attack if reduced to 15 hp or
less, or if ordered to do so by a mind flayer.

Like all golems, brain golems are immune to all forms of
poison and cannot be affected by mind-influencing spells such
as charms or illusions. They are also immune to death magic.

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: In a book by a sage called Hapworth is a tale
told by two rescued human prisoners of the illithids, who
apparently saw a brain golem created. Although the magic
used was unknown to the humans, the brain golem’s body
seemed to be a combination of different racial brains. As for
the head, this was taken from a part of the elder brain of the
mind flayers. The skin was a membrane oozed from that same
being.

Mind flayers use brain golems as they use all slaves: as
heavy guards, used against monsters resistant to mind attacks
or the physical attacks of the illithids. In addition, they are
used to perform tasks that are beneath mind flayers, such as
guarding food stocks and slaves, etc. Because of their undying
loyalty and obedience, the mind flayers prefer brain golems
over other races or constructs. A cynical phrase used by the
githzerai, “treated like a brain golem,” means to be treated
well by a slave master.

No city or community of mind flayers will have more than
25 such golems, probably because the illithids don’t want to
take too much tissue from their beloved elder brain.

Ecology: Except in the services of their masters, brain golems
have no place in any ecology. However, parts of them are use-
ful in the manufacture of mind-affecting magical items
(according to Sage Hapworth, at least).
Golem, Hammer

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Subterranean (dwarf kingdoms)

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Nil

INTELLIGENCE: Non (0)

TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: ]

ARMOR CLASS: 0

MOVEMENT: 6, Br 6

HIT DICE: 14 (60 hp)

THACO: 7

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2d10/2d12

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Pounding force

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Spells immunities, +1 weapon to
hit

MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below

SIZE: L (9’ tall)

MORALE: Fearless (20)

XP VALUE: 13,000

The nightmare of ores and other dwarf enemies, this rare
golem is constructed by dwarf priests, using a process as rare
and carefully guarded as the manufacture of the most power-
ful dwarven magical weapons.

A hammer golem stands about 9 feet tall and weighs about
2,000 Ibs. It resembles a gigantic stone dwarf (beard included)
covered in adamantite plate mail. Its forearms have been
replaced by two weapons—a hammer on the right arm and a
pickaxe or axe on the left.

A hammer golem moves heavily and slowly. When encoun-
tering orcs and their kin, it gives out a hollow roar as it attacks,
but otherwise does not communicate in any way.

Combat: This golem attacks only if ordered to do so by its
master, if it encounters orcs, or if it is kept from its assigned
task. The latter condition allows it to attack if someone tries to
get at what the golem is guarding, for example. The creature
can remember as many commands as its creator wishes, but all
commands may total up to no more than twice the creator’s
Wisdom in words.

When without a master, a hammer golem attacks anything
in front of it until opponents flee, or they leave its charge
alone, or they are dead. If the opponents are goblinoids, only
their death or the golem’s destruction will break off its attack.

This golem attacks first with its hammer hand, inflicting
2d10 points of damage, then with its pick for 2d12 points of
damage. In addition, it can employ a special pounding force
attack once per turn. This is similar to a repulsion spell, except
that, in addition to the usual effects, it inflicts 4d6 points of
damage. If the victim makes a successful saving throw vs.
spell, only half damage is sustained.

While all golems are immune to mind-affecting spells, a
hammer golem is virtually immune to every spell except for
wish, which affects the golem normally, and stone to flesh,
which acts as a heal spell on the hammer golem. In addition, a

 

 

 

 

 

weapon of +1 or greater magical power is required to hit this
golem. Of course, hammer golems are not affected by poison
of any type.

Habitat/Society: As mentioned, hammer golems are made by
dwarf priests, to be employed as guards, warriors, or massive
miners (they can tunnel through solid rock at MV 6). While
most hammer golems possess an axe on the left arm as
described above, one designed specifically for mining has
pickaxes on both appendages.

Ecology: Hammer golems contribute nothing to deep-earth
ecology (or any other), except for the destruction of goblinoids
and the mining of minerals.

 
 

  

Golem, Metagolem

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any land
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Electricity
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)
TREASURE: See below
ALIGNMENT: Any
NO. APPEARING: 1
ARMOR CLASS: See below
MOVEMENT: See below
HIT DICE: 9 (40 hp)
THACO: ll
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: Nil
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spells
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Spell immunities, invulnerable to
electricity
MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below
SIZE: S to M (3°-6’ tall)
MORALE: Fearless (20)
XP VALUE: 3,000—4,000

Metagolems are hollow, metallic humanoid constructs that
have been given magical life. There are as many varieties of
metagolems as there are metals, ranging from those made of
copper to those made of platinum alloys. Like normal golems,
metagolems are animated by elemental spirits. However, they
are also given considerable intelligence and can speak.

Generally speaking, the more exotic the metal, the better
the metagolem’s armor, speed, and damage per hit. Statistics
for metagolems made of common metals are given below:

Metal AC Move Damage
Copper 6 3 1d10
Tin 5 4 2d10
Bronze 4 4 3d10
Iron 3 6 4d10
Stee] 2 7 5d10
Silver l 8 6d10
Electrum () 9 7d10
Gold -] 10 8d10
Platinum -2 1] 9d10

Combat: Metagolems are quite intelligent and employ sound
tactics in battle. Aside from their limited selection of spells
(see below), they never use weapons, preferring to rely on
their fists instead. Despite their intelligence, they remain com-
pletely emotionless and can never be swayed from their goals,

Metagolems can cast fireball, flaming sphere, fly, magic missile,
stinking cloud, and web spells, each once per day, at the 10th
level of ability. They are immune to all illusion/phantasm,
enchantment/charm, and alteration spells cast by wizards,
and to all spells in the Charm sphere of priest magic. Further,
they are not damaged by any attack involving electricity, but
gain energy from such attacks instead (see “Ecology”). Like all
golems, they are not affected by poison of any sort.

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Metagolems are magical automatons created
by powerful wizards to accomplish certain goals such as chas-
ing down hated enemies, collecting treasure, and so forth.
They have no society as such, but they do seem to bear a
strange fondness for others of their kind. Occasionally, several!
metagolems can be found relaxing together on worlds particu-
larly prone to violent lightning storms.

Metagolems have no free will, but always strive to fulfill
the wishes of their creators. The methods of creating
metagolems are not widely known, but only wizards of 18th
level and above can make them. A metagolem has the align-
ment of its creator and an equivalent Strength of 15 for pur-
poses of carrying and lifting items.

Often, a metagolem will join a party of adventurers if it is
clear that doing so will accomplish its masters’ goal. Although
a metagolem makes a surprisingly amiable companion, it is
usually mistrusted, for its companions never know when the
metagolem’s true instructions will interfere with their plans.

Ecology: As with other golems, metagolems can be created by
only powerful wizards. However, unlike regular golems,
metagolems occasionally require a supply of energy in the
form of electricity to continue functioning. Hungry
metagolems are known to insult powerful wizards for the sole
purpose of making the mages so angry that they cast lightning
bolts. Every hit point of damage from electricity powers a
metagolem for one week, to a maximum charge of 100 weeks
of continuous operation. Without this power, metagolems
become dormant until given a new charge.
Golem, Spiderstone

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Subterranean (drow kingdoms)
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Non (0)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1
ARMOR CLASS: 3
MOVEMENT: 9
HIT DICE: 11 (55 hp)
THACO: 9
NO. OF ATTACKS: 4
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d12 (x4)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Web spit
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Spell immunities, +1 weapon to
hit, spider climb
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 50%
SIZE: L(7’ tall)
MORALE: Fearless (20)
XP VALUE: 8,000

Spiderstone golems, also known as obsidian golems, are the
constructed servants of drow spellcasters. Unlike other
golems, each of these is inhabited by the spirit of an unknown
tanar'‘ri servant of the deity Lolth, ensuring that its use is not
directed against Lolth or her servants. Because a spiderstone
golem has a spirit that is not completely bound to its material
form, it is considered to be a lesser golem.

Physically, this golem resembles a large statue of a four-
armed drow carved out of glossy black obsidian. When inac-
tive, no signs of animation are apparent, but when it activates,
the golem’s eyes glow a fiery red. It weighs about 1,000 Ibs.

Combat: In combat, spiderstone golems attack with four fists
or a web spit. This spit has a range of 90 yards and requires an
attack roll. If it hits, anyone within 20 feet is affected as if they
are the victim of a web spell; the being on which the web is cen-
tered gets no saving throw. If the attack roll fails, the “spit”
splatters harmlessly (see the section on “Grenade-like Mis-
siles” in the DMG) and dissipates in 1d4 rounds.

A weapon of at least +1 enchantment is needed to strike a
spiderstone golem.

Spiderstone golems are able to use spider climb at will. They
are immune to all spells except those of drow priests or invo-
cation/evocation spells (though they still roll for magic resis-
tance and gain a saving throw, if applicable).

Each week, there is a small chance for a spiderstone golem
to “go wild.” If commanded by a priest in the service of Lolth,
the chance is only 1%, Otherwise, it varies from 5% to 100%,
depending on what the golem is currently being used for: The
chance is 5% if it’s under the control of a wizard in the service
of Lolth; 50% if it’s being used to guard something of personal
value to the master, but of no use to Lolth; or 100% if it is being
used directly against Lolth.

When a spiderstone golem goes wild, it becomes more cun-
ning, as its Intelligence rises to the Semi (2-4) category. It

 

 

 

 

 

always seeks to kill its master first, then follows the com-
mands of Lolth. In this mode, the golem is capable of design-
ing simple traps, maximizing its abilities fully.

Habitat/Society: Spiderstone golems are most often used for
such tasks as guarding a temple or hunting down enemies of
the priesthood. They can be as useful to wizards as any golem
as well, but their propensity for wildness makes them a dan-
gerous servant.

When under mortal control, a spiderstone golem has as
much intelligence as any golem, though the presence of the
tanar’ri “overseer” gives it an evil alignment. However, it is
able to follow one different command per round, as long as
the command does not exceed four words for a wizard or six
for a priest. This command may be changed from round to
round.

Ecology: Except in the service of drow elves, spiderstone
golems are similar to other subterranean golems in that they
neither give nor take anything from the ecology. However, the
powdered remains of this golem are useful in the creation of
magical scrolls and items related to spiders, webs, and the
abilities of spiders (e.g., scroll of spider climbing, cloak of arach-
nida, arrow of slaying arachnids, etc.). The eyes of a spiderstone
are rubies that may fetch up to 10,000 gp apiece on the open
market.

 
 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN:

Temperate mountains /

 

 

 

 

 

 

subterranean
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: H
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1
ARMOR CLASS: 4
MOVEMENT: 9, Fl 18(E)
HIT DICE: 9
THACO: 11
NO. OF ATTACKS: 5
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d8 (x2) /1d12 (x3)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Tail capture, “wishboning”
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Difficult to surprise

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: G (50° long)
MORALE: Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 2,000

The gorynych is unlikely to be mistaken for a true dragon if
seen in good light. It has a long and supple body covered with
tiny blue-green scales, and it has wings. However, it also has
three wolfish heads and a multitude of tails, starting as three
thick ones at the base of the spine, but eventually dividing out
to as many as 12 whip-thin tails.

The gorynych is not well versed in speech and has no lan-
guage of its own. If there is a race that is dominant in the
regions around its lair, it will have a slight understanding of
this race’s tongue, no matter what it is, but that is the extent of
the beast’s linguistic knowledge. If its lair is in an empty tract
of land, it has no language at all, as there would be no crea-
tures with which to converse (and it doesn’t talk to itself).

Combat: Although the gorynych has no breath weapon, it is a
fearsome fighter. It first whips its flexible tails about in an
attempt to entangle opponents, each tail striking as a separate
attack. Then it uses two claws and three biting attacks on
entrapped foes. The tails inflict no damage, but for every tail
that holds a man-sized victim (smaller creatures are usually
ignored), the gorynych gets a cumulative +1 attack bonus
against that victim. Thus, if it wraps two tails around a fighter,
the gorynych can attack at +2 that round, and if the fighter
fails to eliminate or escape the two tails, it can wrap more tails
around him at +2 to hit in the next round. Each tail sustains
2d6 damage before being severed, and none of these hit points
are counted in the monster's hit-point total; even if rendered
tailless, a gorynych will continue to fight if victory appears
close. When first caught in one of these tails, the victim has a
10% chance of being held in such an awkward position that he
can’t attack the gorynych (25% on rare occasions when a
smaller-than-man-sized creature is attacked).

Another attack form unique to the gorynych is called
“wishboning.” If the beast scores hits on a single opponent
with at least two of its heads in a round, it will try to rip the

 

 

 

 

 

 

victim in half between them, inflicting an additional 2d6
points of damage. It cannot do so automatically in subsequent
rounds, as it must get a new grip (and make a new series of
attacks).

The gorynych has only one personality divided between its
three brains, and each one is capable of directing the entire
body on its own. Thus, cutting off two of the heads will not
disable its thinking or hinder its movements in any way.

Having six dragon-sharp ears to hear with, the gorynych is
difficult to surprise, even when asleep; it gets a +2 bonus on all
surprise rolls. In addition, since it has more than one head, it
cannot be attacked from behind, as it peers in all directions.

Habitat/Society: The gorynych prefers windy and desolate
regions. It lives in deep caverns, and the long, winding tunnels
of its lair are full of evidence of its presence: scales scrapped
off on the rocks, claw marks, the occasional coin or gem
dropped from its mouth when stocking its hoard, and the rare
bone that misses the periodic cleaning out of refuse. While the
creature avoids areas where human incursions are frequent, it
is intelligent enough to note any roadways, caravan paths, and
isolated settlements within a few hours’ flight of its cave, so it
has little trouble finding food and treasure.

Gorynyches reproduce by laying eggs, but the young are
forced out into the world as soon as possible after hatching.
The young grow rapidly, attaining full growth in nine years
and living for about 400 years total.

Ecology: Gorynyches are usually the most powerful carni-
vores in their local food chain. They rarely interact with other
species, intelligent or not. However, they are often attacked by
other highly competitive and magically powerful monsters
such as dragons and beholders.
Greelox

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any underground /ruins
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: High (13-14)
TREASURE: A

ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 1

MOVEMENT: 15, Wb 21, Jp3

HIT DICE: 6+12

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 5

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d3 (x2)/2d6 (x2)/2d4
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Poison, webs, shadow magic
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: L (14’ diameter)
MORALE: Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: 4,000

Greelox are powerful, spiderlike creatures. In addition to eight
spiny, spiderlike legs, greelox have two limbs that function as
arms. Their two front legs end in scythelike blades, Greelox
are gray and brown, with dull red eyes and black claws and
mandibles.

Greelox speak their own language and those of any race
that lives within 20 miles of their lairs. In addition, they may
speak any other language they hear spoken for one hour or
more.

Combat: Greelox attack with two of their spider legs (1d3
points of damage apiece), with their two humanoid arms (2d6
points of damage apiece), and they bite for 2d4 points of dam-
age. They may wield weapons and shields in their humanoid
hands, in which case damage is inflicted according to weapon
type. The bite of the greelox is poisonous—it injects a variant
of type F poison into the wound—and the victim must roll a
successful saving throw or die in 1d4 rounds. Even if the sav-
ing throw is successful, the victim becomes nauseated for 3d4
rounds, imposing a -2 penalty upon attack rolls and a +1
penalty to Armor Class (due to slowed movement) for the
duration of the effects. A victim whose bare flesh comes in
contact with a greelox web suffers 1 point damage per round
from the acidic coating secreted through the creature's skin
and onto anything it touches. (The acid affects only organic
material.)

A greelox may choose to forgo all its attacks for one round
and spin webbing equivalent to a web spell cast by a 6th-level
wizard. The monster can direct this sticky substance at any
target within 90 feet. This may be done once per turn.

Alternatively, in any one round a greelox may forgo any
attacks and manipulate the surrounding shadows to achieve a
variety of effects, equivalent to a shadow magic spell cast by a
9th-level wizard. The greelox may also invoke dimension door
through shadows at will. Of course, the greelox must have

 

 

 

 

 

shadows present to perform this feat, but it may travel up to
210 feet in this manner, A greelox may hide in shadows as a
thief does, with a 90% chance of success. A +2 or better
weapon is required to hit a greelox, and it is immune to all
forms of poison and acid.

Habitat/Society: Greelox are solitary creatures on the Prime
Material Plane, but there are rumors of greelox cities in the
Demiplane of Shadow: massive mazes of webs that take up
acres of terrain.

Greelox young are born live and are abandoned soon there-
after. They grow rapidly, reaching full size in one year. Greelox
live an average of 50 years.

Ecology: These creature serve little purpose within the Prime
Material Plane, other than to consume wandering vermin and
small monsters that wander into their lairs. Dried greelox
webbing is useful to wizards in the preparation of oil! of acid
resistance.

 
 

Helmed Horror

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any

 

 

 

 

 

 

FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Special
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Nil
INTELLIGENCE: High (13-14)
TREASURE: V

ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1d20

ARMOR CLASS: 2

MOVEMENT: 12, Fl 12(E)

HIT DICE: 4+1 per level of the creator
THACO: 12

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4 or by weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Special

SIZE: M (6'-7’" tall)
MORALE: Special

XP VALUE: 2,000

A helmed horror is empty, animated armor, capable of inde-
pendent reasoning. It is neither undead nor a summoned crea-
ture. Often found as a guardian, this automaton appears to be
a warrior completely clad in plate mail.

Combat: Helmed horrors can use al] weapons allowed to
fighters, and employ magical items that need no verbal com-
mands or contact with living flesh to function (such as potions
or ointments). Horrors cannot cast spells.

A helmed horror can see invisible creatures and objects up
to 120 feet away, and it has infravision to the same range. Its
senses permeate its entire form—a “dehelmed” horror fights
on, although separated appendages cease to move. (If brought
back into contact with a horror, they reattach. A horror can't
collect lost pieces and reattach them, but others can.) A horror
heals lost hit points at the same rate as a living, resting human,
restoring linking energies and mangled armor.

Helmed horrors are able to stand through levitation. Thus,
they can walk on air or function without any legs at all. This
allows flight at the movement rate given above, but it doesn’t
allow riders. (A falling horror is always protected as if a feather
fall spell were cast upon it.) They can carry up to 200 Ibs. of liv-
ing or nonliving matter when on foot, but only 100 Ibs. of non-
living matter if “flying.”

A helmed horror is fearless and cannot be controlled by
magical or other means that work on the mind or senses. It can
be contacted by means of ESP or similar spells, but it cannot
be affected by illusions or enchantment/charms. Any mental
contact with a horror allows it to read the current surface
thoughts and emotions of the being contacting it, despite any
defenses, which allows them to sense treachery and unerr-
ingly judge the sincerity of mentally encountered creatures.

Magic missile spells cast at a horror actually heal it by restor-
ing its bonding energy. Excess hit points (above its maximum)
are not gained by a horror, but are reflected back at the caster.

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Horrors are seldom self-willed wanderers,
but they continue to serve as guardians even after the deaths
of their masters, operating continuously until destroyed. Some
have been known to avenge a slain creator, following orders
instilled in them. In some cases the horror’s orders even allow
it autonomy in the absence of commands.

Ecology: The process of creating helmed horrors remains
secret, but it is known to require a priest of at least 7th level,
some assistance from a wizard, and any nonmagical armor.
The creator inputs a set of commands that govern its freedom,
behavior, and limitations. The orders cannot be changed once
given, and loopholes may put its loyalty in jeopardy; instilling
orders in a horror is as delicate as wording a wish spell.

A horror can be made immune to the effects of three spe-
cific spells when created (typically fireball, heat metal, and light-
ning bolt). These spells must be named by the creator (who
need not be able to cast them or have access to them) and can-
not be changed thereafter. A horror’s orders can never increase
its spell immunity beyond three specific magics.

Horrors don’t sleep, eat, or speak, and they cannot feel
pain. They are ideal guardians, for their loyalty is total and
devoid of ambition or emotion. If commanded by a telepathic
being, they can communicate, and a garrison of horrors can be
coordinated into a well-organized fighting band.

Battle Horrors

This appears identical to the helmed horror, but it can dimen-
sion door up to 180 feet once per day; blink for up to one turn
once per day (it cannot cease blinking and start again, even if
it hasn’t used a full turn); and cast magic missile (two 1d4+1
missiles every three rounds, with a range of 70 yards). Battle
horrors are lawful evil and have an XP value of 4,000.
Jarbo

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any desert
FREQUENCY: Common
ORGANIZATION: Flock/ colony
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Varies (usually night)
DIET: Herbivore
INTELLIGENCE: Animal (1)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1d20
ARMOR CLASS: 7
MOVEMENT: 24

HIT DICE: %& (1d4 hp)
THACO: 20

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

 

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d3
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: T (2' tall)
MORALE: Unreliable (2-4)
XP VALUE: 7

The jarbo is a hardy rodent that resembles the kangaroo rat,
but it’s larger, reaching a mature height of 2 feet at the shoul-
der. Its coat is typically sand colored or tawny, but pelt mark-
ings vary, the better to blend with their home terrain.

Jarbo species differ in appearance in other ways, mainly in
ear size or number of toes. All share the round, furry body,
stubby forelegs, very lang hind legs, and a long tail. In some
species the tail is furred, in others not, but all use it for balance
as they skitter on their hind legs at enormous speed across the
desert sand.

The jarbo has a psionic ability to sense water across great
distances, independent of wind currents. This works as a vari-
ant of heightened senses (see The Complete Psionics Handbook),
a psychometabolic devotion that applies to the Jarbo’s sense of
smell, and for sensing water only. A teaspoonful of water can
lure a flock of jarbos from 100 yards, a sealed barrel can draw
them from a mile away, and an oasis brings them in from any-
where throughout an entire region.

Combat: Jarbos fear larger creatures and flee from any con-
flict. They run with blinding speed, their chief defense. The
only aggressive jarbos are those who see their masters (if they
have one) threatened. Though loyal companions, they are inef-
fective as protectors; their sharp teeth inflict only 1d3 points of
damage.

Jarbos are not prone to disease, but in rare cases a “ foaming
sickness” like rabies strikes one and drives it mad. The insane
jarbo attacks any creature in sight, fighting to the death. Vic-
tims must make a successful Constitution check to avoid being
infected with a serious disease (as per the common rat—see
the MONSTROUS MANUAL tome).

Habitat/Society: Jarbos live in migratory colonies (flocks) that
travel by night from one source of water to the next, running
ahead of their many predators. On arrival at a new site, the

 

 

 

 

 

colony locates a dry stream bed or the foot of a cliff and digs
two dozen or more nests, each a long tunnel, a foot wide, and
leading to a burrow 3 feet in diameter. The flexible jarbos eas-
ily squeeze through the winding tunnels.

After a few nights or a week, predators usually locate this
rich source of food, so the jarbos move on with the next moon-
rise, keeping, as always, a few steps ahead of those who
would eat them.

Ecology: Virtually all predators dine on jarbos. The rodents
are an important link in many desert food chains.

Jarbos, themselves, feed on seeds, grass, and insects. They
often attract travelers’ interest and envy because they can sur-
vive on very little water. An adult jarbo can thrive on a few
tablespoons of water per day, or go up to a week between
major waterings. For the most part, their diet provides them
with enough fluid. Their ability to sense water serves to help
them locate the concentrations of edible vegetation and insects
that cluster around what little water there is to be found.

Jarbo pelts are too thin for the fur trade, but the small skins
are sometimes used as decorations on ceremonial garb or fur-
niture. A good jarbo pelt is worth up to one gp in some
regions.

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Swamp
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Magic
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: ]

ARMOR CLASS: 6
MOVEMENT: FI 12(A)

HIT DICE: 15

THACO: >

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 plus special
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4+1
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spells, drain magic
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Special

SIZE: L (10’ diameter)
MORALE: Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: 2,000

The laraken is also known as a “magic-drainer” because it
feeds on magical energy.

The creature appears as a shining yellow sphere that can
wink out at will, reappearing elsewhere in a moment. It has a
pair of yellow tentacles which protrude from opposite points
on the sphere. The laraken is a distant relative of the nishruu
(q.v.), but it is for the most part confined to swamplands, for
its body must stay wet or it becomes very uncomfortable.

Laraken speak no known languages.

Combat: The laraken is capable of lashing out with one tenta-
cle, once per round, inflicting 1d4 + 1 points of damage per hit.
A successful attack also drains a spell from any spellcaster, or
a charge or a “plus” from a magical item. As it drains these, it
gains the power it has absorbed. For example, if the creature
attacks and hits a magical sword +2, it drains one of the 2
“pluses” from that weapon and then receives a +1 bonus to hit
and damage from then on. Also, if the laraken strikes a wiz-
ard, it drains a spell from him or her and then it is able to cast
that spell.

The laraken prefers most to drain memorized spells, then
charges from magical items with spell-like effects, then pluses
from magical items. When draining spells from a wizard, it
steals the highest-level spell that the spellcaster has memo-
rized. If the victim possesses two or more spells of the same
level, the drained spell is randomly chosen. As the draining
occurs, the wizard must immediately make a successful sav-
ing throw vs. death magic, adjusted for Wisdom, or fall uncon-
scious for 1d10 turns.

The laraken’s tentacles can each sustain 10% of the total hit
points of the creature before being severed. (Note that a
weapon which hits the tentacle is subject to the effects of the
touch, even if the attack severs the appendage.) These tenta-
cles can be regenerated. To do so, the laraken directs one
absorbed spell level per lost hit point to the stump—when

 

 

 

 

 

 

10% of the creature's total hit points have been regenerated
with the spell energy, the tentacle has fully regrown. The
laraken does not receive any bonuses or spell effects for the
levels it channels into regeneration.

Habitat/Society: Laraken hate all intelligent life and always
attack when they find a party that possesses spellcasters or
magic, which they can sense from 200 yards away. However,
they will not attack or follow a party on dry land.

Laraken were brought here when a great conjurer sum-
moned them from some unknown alternate Prime Material
Plane. On their own plane, they lived in a very wet and
swampy country. They are uncomfortable in areas with a
humidity of less than 95%, so even a jungle can sometimes
seem a very dry place to a laraken.

Ecology: Laraken feed only on magic. They attack merely
because of the intense hatred for those who summoned them
to this plane, which they consider to be anything of roughly
humanoid shape.

Laraken use stored magical energy to maintain an open
gate to the Elemental Plane of Water, which is their primary
source of food. Should this gate be closed, the creature will
starve unless it can absorb enough energy to cast gate within a
week, If it can be drawn or dragged away from its wet habitat,
it will die in 24 hours.

Laraken reproduce by absorbing a regenerate spell and
growing a new creature from a severed tentacle. It is thought
that they had other means of reproducing on their own plane,
but those conditions do not exist here. This means, thankfully,
that laraken are very rare, and are likely to remain so. Laraken
need to absorb the equivalent of three spell levels per day.
Lich, Psionic

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any land

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Psionic energy

INTELLIGENCE: Supra-genius (19-20)

TREASURE: A

ALIGNMENT: Any evil

NO. APPEARING: ]

ARMOR CLASS: 0

MOVEMENT: 6

HIT DICE: 9+18

THACO: 1]

NO. OF ATTACKS: l

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d8+2

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Psionics, mind struck power,
psionics-draining touch

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Psionics, spell immunities,

+1 weapon to hit, phylactery

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: M (6’ tall)
MORALE: Fanatic (17-18)
XP VALUE: 16,000
PSIONICS SUMMARY:
Level Dis/Sci/Dev Att/Def Score PSPs
20 6/10/25 all /all 18 §2

Clairsentience—Sciences: aura sight, object reading; Devotions:
spirit sense.
Psychokinesis—Devotions: animate shadow.
Psychometabolism—Sciences: death field, life draining, shad-
owform; Devotions: aging, cause decay, displacement, ecto-
plasmic form.
Psychoportation—Sciences; teleport; Devotions: astral projec-
tion, dimensional door, dream travel.
Telepathy—Sciences: domination, mindwipe, psychic crush,
tower of iron will; Devotions: contact, ego whip ESP, id insinua-
tion, inflict pain, intellect fortress, mental barrier, mind bar,
mind blank, mind thrust, psionic blast, thought shield.
Metapsionics—Sciences; empower; Devotions: psionic sense,
psychic drain, receptacle, wrench.

These powers are common to psionic liches, but it is not
unusual for some to have different powers.

There are few who dare to argue that the power of a master
psionicist is any less than that of an archmage. Proof of this
can be found in the fact that powerful psionicists are actually
able to extend their lives beyond the spans granted to them by
nature, just as powerful wizards are known to do.

Psionic liches look much like their magical counterparts.
Their flesh has mummified, pulling it tight over their bones
and giving them a gaunt, skeletal appearance. Their eye sock-
ets are empty and burn with crimson pinpoints of light. Often,
a psionic lich will be found in the clothes it favored in life.
Because this can be anything from the grand robes of nobility
to the plate armor of a mighty knight, it is impossible to spot
these creatures by their garb. (Metallic armor, if worn, will
lower the lich’s psionic power score, as per The Complete Psion-

 

 

 

 

 

shields will not do so.)

Psionic liches retain the abilities that they learned in life:
languages, proficiencies, thieving skills, etc. Further, a psionic
lich who was human may actually have been a dual-class
character in life, and thus may be able to employ psionic pow-
ers plus magical or clerical spells. Creatures with such abilities
are rare, thankfully, but are truly terrible opponents.

Combat: Psionic liches seldom engage their foes personally, as
they surround themselves with legions of minions. Hence,
many adventurers never learn the true nature of their enemy.
When forced to engage in direct combat, however, psionic
liches are among the most deadly opponents that any band of
heroes is ever likely to face.

The emanations of power that shroud a psionic lich are
detectable even by those without psychic powers. Those who
come within 50 yards of such creatures will be affected by this
aura, requiring a successful save vs, spell or becoming mind
struck. Such characters make all attack and damage rolls with a
-2 penalty and must double the casting time of any spells
(which allows saving throws for opponents at +2). The effects
of this aura can be countered by any spell or psionic power
that would diminish or remove fear or inspire bravery.

If the lich is able to deliver a touch attack in combat, the
malignant aura of psionic power that encircles it rips at the
opponent's life force, inflicting 1d8 + 2 points of damage. In
addition, psionic characters will find their PSPs drawn away.
Each physical blow will strip the victim of a number of PSPs
equal to twice the number of points of damage the blow
inflicted. This loss is not permanent, and the PSPs can be
regained through normal means.

Just as normal liches have spent decades or even centuries
in the research of new and unique magical powers, so too do
the undead masters of the mind have powers undreamed of
by mortal men. It is not all uncommon for adventurers who

 
 

Lich, Psionic

 

come across these dreaded creatures to be confronted with
psionic powers that have never been documented elsewhere.
These new powers will conform to the general standards
established in The Complete Psionics Handbook for function,
damage, area of effect, range, etc., but may differ greatly from
standard powers in terms of the effects that they cause. Insight
into the creation of new psionic powers can be gleaned from
the section on spell research in the DMG.

Further, liches are able to employ magical items just as they
did in life, and they may have quite a formidable collection of
enchanted trinkets to use against adventurers.

It is important to note that psionic liches differ from the tra-
ditional ranks of the undead. Because the force sustaining
them is mental and not mystical, they are far more resistant to
spells, spell-like powers, or psionic sciences and devotions
involving charm, fear, or the like. Treat them as having the
equivalent of a 25 Wisdom for purposes of determining what
spells they are resistant to (see the PHB, Table 5). Spells like
sleep or finger of death, which base their effects upon a biologi-
cal function in the spell recipient, also do not affect psionic
liches; again, psionic powers similar to these spells are also
ineffective (e.g., life detection).

Psionic liches can be turned by priests, paladins, and simi-
lar characters, but since they are not magical in nature, they
are more resistant to this power than are other undead. Thus,
they are turned on the “special” row of the Turning Undead
table. Psionic liches are immune to harm from normal
weapons, but can be struck by weapons of +1 or better power.
Spells or other powers based upon cold have no effect upon
them. Other spells inflict normal damage. Psionic liches can be
attacked in normal psionic combat, except as noted before.

In order to protect itself from destruction, a psionic lich
employs a special form of phylactery (see “Ecology”) that
houses its life force. Although a lich may be defeated in com-
bat, it cannot be truly destroyed unless its phylactery can be
found and obliterated. As mostJiches take great care to protect
these vital objects from the prying hands of heroes, this can be
quite a challenge.

Habitat/Society: Psionic liches are powerful espers who have
left behind the physical demands of life in pursuit of ultimate
mental powers. They have little interest in the affairs of the liv-
ing, except as they relate to the lich’s search for psychic mas-
tery and knowledge. Those who encounter the lich usually do
so when the creature feels that it must leave its self-imposed
isolation for a time.

Psionic liches often hide themselves away in some place
that “feels” safe to them, Since most of them can sense the
auras and emanations of the world around them quite keenly,
their judgment is usually sound. For the most part, however,
these creatures will reside in places associated with death or
learning. If the two can be combined in some way, all the bet-
ter. For example, an ideal lair for a psionic lich might be the
great library of a castle that was buried in a volcanic eruption.

When it comes out into the world, a psionic lich generally
assembles a great network of minions. Curiously, these follow-
ers are seldom undead themselves. More often than not, they
are young espers who seek to learn from an obvious master.
What they often do not understand is that their leader has lit-
tle interest in them apart from their role in any immediate
plans. Once the master’s goal has been accomplished, the fol-
lowers will be cast aside without thought. Those who do not
simply leave when the lich demands it will probably find
themselves mercilessly slain.

Ecology: Being undead, psionic liches have no place in the
natural world as we know it. Although the power that trans-
formed them is natural (not supernatural, like magic), the
extent to which psionic liches have pursued their goals is defi-
nitely not natural. By twisting the powers of their minds to
extend their existence beyond the bounds of mortal life,
psionic liches become exiles. Cast out from the land of the liv-
ing, these creatures sometimes lament the foolishness that led
them down the dark path of the undead.

By far, the most important aspect of the existence of the
psionic lich is the creation of its phylactery. To understand this
mystical device, it is important to understand the process by
which a psionicist becomes a lich, Before a psionicist can cross
over into the darkness that is undeath, he must attain at least
18th level. In addition, he must possess a great array of pow-
ers that can be bent and focused in ways new to the character.

The first step in the creation of a phylactery is the construc-
tion of the physical object that will become the creature's spiri-
tual resting place. Phylacteries come in all shapes, from rings
to crowns. They are made from only the finest materials and
must be fashioned by master craftsmen. Generally, a phylac-
tery is fashioned in a shape that reflects the personality of the
psionicist. The cost of creating a phylactery is 5,000 gp per
level of the character. Thus, a 20th-level psionicist must spend
100,000 gp on his artifact.

Once the phylactery is fashioned, it must be readied to
receive the psionicist’s life force. This is generally done by
means of the metapsionic empower ability, with some subtle
changes in the way the psionicist uses the power that alter its
outcome. In order to complete a phylactery, the psionicist
must empower it with each and every psionic ability that he
possesses. Although an object cannot normally be empowered
with psychic abilities in more than one discipline, the unusual
nature of the phylactery allows this rule to be broken. How-
ever, before “opening” a new discipline within the object, the
would-be lich must transfer all of his powers from the first dis-
cipline into it. For example, if a character has telepathic and
metapsionic abilities, he must complete the empowering of all
of his telepathic powers before he begins to infuse the object
with his metapsionic ones. Once a discipline is “closed,” it
cannot be reopened.

During the creation of the phylactery, the psionicist is vul-
nerable to attack. Each time that he gives his phylactery a new
power, he loses it himself. Thus, the process strips away the
powers of the psionicist as it continues. Obviously, the last
power that is transferred into the phylactery is the empower
ability. The effort of placing this ability within the phylactery
drains the last essences of the psionicist’s life from him and
completes his transformation into a psionic lich. At the
moment that the transformation takes place, the character
must make a system shock survival roll. Failure indicates that
his willpower was not strong enough to survive the trauma of
becoming undead; his spirit breaks up and dissipates, leaving
him forever dead. Only the powers of a deity are strong
enough to revive a character who has died in this way, and
even a wish spell will not suffice.
Living Steel

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Subterranean
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Metal
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: See below
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: —2
MOVEMENT: 12 Sw in metal 36
HIT DICE: 10

THACO: 11

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d10 (x2)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 20%

SIZE: M (6 tall)
MORALE: Fearless (19-20)
XP VALUE: 5,000

Living steel usually appears as a humanoid mass of pure,
shining steel, almost liquid in its motions. It reflects bright
light and absorbs heat; to those with infravision, it appears as
a cold blue lump. Although it is not normally an aggressive
opponent, living steel can be ferocious when aroused, and it
will track its enemies mercilessly until it or they are dead.

Combat: Living steel is completely immune to weapons of less
than +2 enchantment. Any attacks by other weapons slide
right through its form and serve only to irritate it. It simply
reforms around the place where the weapon passed.

Living steel’s most dangerous weapon is its ability to
change shape at will. Although it cannot change its color and
therefore is easily spotted, its form can include virtually any-
thing. It can become a coursing steel] hound or a human with
blades for its lower arms. However, the form it adopts does
not confer the powers of that form. For example, it cannot fly
in bird form, nor does it gain the sense of smell dogs have
when it takes that form, nor would it gain poison or magical
immunity should it take another shape. Finally, it cannot
assume the form of something with a larger or smaller mass. It
must maintain its own body weight at all times. Thus, unless it
was very large, the steel could not reproduce the form of a
dragon, nor could it split to become a mosquito. However, it
does gain the speed associated with the form it takes. It also
can fit through tiny cracks by reforming its body. This
shapechange takes a round to accomplish, and the living steel
can do it at will.

During the time of shapechange, the steel cannot make any
attacks, nor can it defend itself. At this point its AC becomes 5
and it may be hit by ordinary weapons. For this reason, the
steel rarely changes form during combat.

Living steel is immune to electricity- and fire-based attacks,
unless they inflict more than 55 points of damage. The electric-
ity otherwise flows directly through the steel and the fire sim-
ply liquefies it, actually allowing it to change form and attack

 

 

 

 

geet) tay
Lf 1! BAP

within the same round. If these attacks cause more than 55 hit
points of damage, the steel suffers full damage and must
spend two rounds regaining the pieces of itself that were
blown away by the force of the explosion.

Cold-based attacks, on the other hand, serve to slow both
the movement of living steel (Move of 6, only 1 attack) and its
shapechanging abilities (two rounds are required to change
form under these circumstances). Cold attacks also enable its
opponents to cause double damage for two rounds following
a successful attack, as well as enabling those without magical
weapons to harm it.

Habitat/Society: Living steel has no known society. Solitary
creatures all their lives, they reproduce asexually. If two living
steels encounter one another, they battle to the death. The one
with the most inventive and damaging shapes is usually the
victor, consuming the loser and adding the vanquished crea-
ture to its own mass.

These creatures lair in small nooks in the rock, usually with
only a thin crack as access. Only in their lairs do they relax the
forms they have chosen, and here they appear as formless
blobs of fine steel.

Ecology: Living steel survives only through a diet of iron. It is
therefore generally found only near veins of iron ore or in
regions where iron is otherwise avaliable in abundance. Most
of the iron is burned off to power the creature’s movements,
but the steel drops a small, refined portion of it in its lair at the
end of each day. This mass is an embryonic living steel, and it
becomes sentient and mobile after one year of this refining,
provided the steel has daily access to a vein of ore.

 
 

Lock Lurker

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any land
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 3

MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 143

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: l
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1 (bite) or 1d4+5 (sting)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Paralyzing venom
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Partial etherealness

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: T (1” diameter, 1’-long tail)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 175

The tiny lock lurker is the bane of thieves and is often placed
as a guard against such infiltrators. It looks like a coin—a cold,
hard, coppery or bronze disk (25% are silver or golden). It has
two rows of tiny, retractable legs on its underside, surround-
ing a razor-sharp iris of teeth, and a lightning-fast stinger that
can be up to a foot long, but this stinger is usually on the Ethe-
real Plane, invisible to observers on the Prime Material.

A human handling a lurker often thinks he has picked up a
smooth, heavy coin until its sting advises him otherwise.
Lurkers have been known to be carried with other coins until
reaching a place where easy targets will come near. Unless it
strikes metal, the lurker’s bite and sting are silent.

Combat: A lurker’s teeth can bite through hide, hair, or leather
armor, but not metal. The stinger can attack creatures in the
Ethereal Plane and materializes on the Prime Material Plane
only when the lurker launches an attack; that strike is power-
ful enough to pierce any armor and stun opponents of less
than man size for 1-2 rounds. It inflicts damage and injects a
venom into the victim’s bloodstream which slows him (per the
wizard spell) on the round following the strike. During that
round, the victim’s body reacts to the poison, prompting a
saving throw. If the save is successful, the victim is slowed for
a second round, then recovers fully. If the save fails, the victim
is immediately paralyzed for 1d6 hours, passes into a
id2-round slowed state, then recovers. This paralysis is a
rigid muscle lock affecting all extremities. A victim cannot be
easily manipulated and can easily be hurt if moved. The lurker
can sting 40 + 2d4 times per day without exhausting its poi-
son. Venom and any food ingested by a lurker are both held in
expandable body sacks on the Ethereal Plane, transferred to
and from the Prime Material in a way not fully understood.
The stinger can be attacked on the Prime Material only if
materialized there. On the Ethereal, all parts of a lurker can be
attacked unless it fully enters the Prime Material (requires one
round, allowing an ethereal creature an unchallenged attack).

 

=

 

 

ts
7 ry

ca TN

 

 

 

A lurker can transfer body material between the two planes
despite any physical or magical restraints placed on it, but can
never fully withdraw into the Ethereal Plane. Lurker attacks
and venom have the same effects on both planes, and lurkers
have 60-foot-range normal and infravision on both planes.
Lurkers can slowly regenerate lost or damaged body parts.

Habitat/Society: Lock lurkers are so named because they are
often placed as guards on chests and doors, to strike unwary
interlopers through keyholes. Assassins have placed them
under inkwells and pillows, in boots, and in other places con-
venient to a strike (usually so the paralyzed target can be slain
easily, with no alarm being raised).

Lurkers are hermaphroditic; whenever two adults meet,
they mate and go their separate ways. One to four months
later, each lurker lays an egg sack of 1d12 x 10 tiny eggs, 60%
of which are fertile. Untended, these hatch in 1d6 weeks, typi-
cally producing 3d6 offspring. These eat the unhatched eggs
(and sometimes each other) until they are fully mobile, then
wander off in search of food. They never fight other lurkers,
and they mature within seven years.

Ecology: Lurkers are usually placed as guards, but when one
escapes into the wild, it does not so much hunt as /urk. Like
some spiders, lurkers seem to prefer to lair in civilized areas,
preying on insects, rodents, and other small pests.

Lurker venom is valued as an ingredient in inks, potions,
and processes concerned with slow effects. Their bodies are a
preferred ingredient in oil of etherealness, too, and a largely
intact body is worth 2 gp (6 gp if the stinger is intact). Lock
lurker venom (a clear, gummy fluid that smells like seaweed)
brings about 10 gp per flask. Lurker egg sacks bring about 25
gp on the open market.
Loxo

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate, tropical grasslands
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Herd

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Herbivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low to exceptional (5-16)
TREASURE: U (Z)

ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 10d6

ARMOR CLASS: 6

MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 4+4

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2d6 (x2) or by weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Trample, berserker rage
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Spells

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: | Nil

SIZE: L (8 tall)
MORALE: Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: 650 (Fithik—975,

lox-fithik—2,000, tunnuk—varies)

A loxo appears to be a humanoid elephant. Its skin is bluish-
gray and wrinkled, with rough, sparse hair. It has thick round
limbs, flat feet, and short, stubby fingers. Large ears grace its
head, and tusks protrude from its face. Its most striking fea-
ture is the pair of trunks that grow from its face. Each is about
2 feet long and has three fingerlike digits at the end.

These creatures wear simple, rustic clothing, favoring cloth
with patterns such as circles and diamonds.

Combat: Loxoth are peaceful, but males defend their territory
and families with great tenacity. They prefer melee to long-
range combat, and use few missile weapons. Preferred melee
weapons are dirks, clubs, and footman’s maces. Fully 60% of
loxoth carry iron maces, and half of those also carry shuriken.
Another 20% also carry a heavy melee club and two throwing
clubs, while 10% use dirks and shuriken. The remaining 10%
carry only a footman’s mace and iron-shod club.

If threatened, half the loxoth males defend the females and
young while the other half attacks. They use their trunks to
throw shuriken, and can do so in the same round during
which they attack with a melee weapon. If charging man-sized
or smaller opponents, the loxoth may make a trampling attack
that inflicts 2d8 points of damage. If a loxo’s family is threat-
ened, there is a 10% chance per round (noncumulative) that it
enters a berserkerlike rage, affording an extra attack per
round, a +2 bonus to attack rolls, and 10 temporary hit points.
The berserker rage lasts until the danger to the loxo’s family
has passed. A berserker loxo never attacks another loxo.

For every 10 loxoth encountered, there is one 5th-level
fighter, called a fithik, or lieutenant. Each herd also has one lox-
fithik, or chief, a 7th-level fighter. Half of all herds have a tun-
nuk, or wizard, which may advance as high as 20th level.

Habitat/Society: The loxoth are seminomadic, traveling grass-
lands in small clans consisting of 1d6 small family units as

 

 

 

 

 

well as in groups of unattached males. Each family unit is
made up of one male, 1d3 females, and 3d4 young. The unat-
tached males number 6d4. All members of a clan use the same
pattern in their clothing. When a herd becomes too large, it
splits into two parts, with the younger leader taking his herd
to a new territory, but all herds of a given clan remain friendly.

Male loxoth are dominant both politically and militarily,
taking as many mates as they can defend from other males.
Loxoth may mate at any time, but take as mates only those of
the same clan. After a gestation period of 18 months, the
female bears one or two calves. Loxoth may live as long as 200
years. If a male sees his family die or murdered, he may (95%)
enter the berserk state, attack any nonloxo he finds, and
threaten any loxo who approaches. He remains in this state,
losing 1d6 hit points per day, until he dies from exhaustion.

Some loxoth work with wood, metal, and ivory from the
tusks of their dead. Loxoth make their own weapons, using
their strong, clumsy hands to form dirks and blunt weapons
and their weaker, more dexterous trunks for finer work. Ivory
is carved into religious figurines and kept as heirlooms, while
wood is shaped into various decorations. Because of their
physical limitations, loxoth can produce only very crude or
very fine metalwork, with nothing in between; they can make
maces and jewelry, but swords are beyond their ability.

Ecology: Loxoth eat a great amount of plant material, often as
much as 100 pounds per day each, yet they work diligently to
preserve their grazing lands. They travel to different areas
periodically and plant fruit trees and grains in all the areas
they frequent so they might have a variety of food.

Loxoth use their fine artwork for trade. Loxoth tusks are
worth up to 250 gold pieces each, but stealing, buying, or sell-
ing them is considered the highest crime among the loxoth.

 
 

  

Lycanthrope, Loup du Noir

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Boreal forest or plains
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Pack
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any (night)
DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: D
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1d6

ARMOR CLASS: 3
MOVEMENT: 15

HIT DICE: 64+3

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1]
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2d6 or by weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Seize throat
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: M (6’ long)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 1,400

The loup du noir, or skinchanger, is a lycanthrope that trans-
forms by donning the skin of a wolf. In ancient times, some
human hunters learned to assume the shape of a wolf to better
stalk and kill their prey, and the practice eventually became a
heritable trait. A few skinchangers still linger in the world
today, people with a dark and sinister ability to assume the
form of a savage, murderous beast.

Loup du noir have only two forms: human or wolf. In their
human form they possess a normal character class and abili-
ties. The wolf form is as large and foul-tempered as a dire
wolf, and it possesses several special abilities.

A loup du noir must have a special pelt that it can use to
perform its skinchanging transformation into wolf form. If the
loup du noir cannot put on its wolf skin, it is unable to become
a wolf.

Combat: In human form the loup du noir wears armor, uses
spells, and attacks with weapons as a normal person. In wolf
form the loup du noir attacks with a powerful bite for 2d6
points of damage. On a natural roll of 20, the loup du noir
seizes its victim's throat and inflicts double normal damage.

The dark sorcery that allows the loup du noir to assume its
bestial form also protects it from many forms of attack. The
lycanthrope is immune to all charm and hold effects, and it
receives a +4 bonus to saving throws vs. any other mind-
affecting spell. It suffers damage from silver weapons or
weapons that have had a bless spell cast upon them, but
wounds from normal weapons heal too quickly to cause any
damage. Magical weapons can harm the loup du noir, but
unless they are made of silver or have had a bless spell cast
upon them, they only cause half damage.

Habitat/Society: The loup du noir is a solitary creature, but it
is possible for several people (for example, all the members of
a family or a band of hunters) to have learned the magic neces-

 

 

 

 

 

sary for the skinchange. In human form, the loup du noir is
often a hunter or outdoorsman.

Loup du noir are unusual because they have brought their
condition upon themselves. Whatever their motivation, they
soon find themselves seduced by the power of their new
shape. Once a character has tasted of the wolf’s strength, the
desire is strong to repeat the transformation. A character
resisting the urge to transform must roll a saving throw vs.
spell with a cumulative -1 penalty for each day that has
passed since the last transformation. Failure indicates an irre-
sistible urge to change.

In wolf form, a loup du noir retains full human intelligence.
This makes it a cunning and dangerous opponent. However,
its human judgment is clouded by an intense bloodlust that
can turn it against any creature it encounters, even innocents
or friends. If the loup du noir is driven to attack someone or
something it might not want to, the creature may roll a saving
throw vs. spell to attempt to resist. There is a cumulative —1
penalty to the roll for each day that the loup du noir has not
killed something; eventually, the creature must give in to its
murderous urges.

Ecology: The loup du noir is not a natural predator, and it kills
indiscriminately despite its human intelligence. In wolf form
the loup du noir can spread lycanthropy by wounding its vic-
tims; there is a 1% chance per point of damage that a character
wounded by a loup du noir becomes infected. The loup du
noir is not considered to be a master lycanthrope and cannot
induce the transformations of its victims or contro] their
actions, however.

The curse of a loup du noir is passed to its children, Off-
spring born in wolf form are wolfweres, while its human-born
young have the potential to become loup du noir.
Lycanthrope, Werebadger

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate hills /subterranean
FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)

TREASURE: M,O,V

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil

NO. APPEARING: l

ARMOR CLASS: 4

MOVEMENT: 6, Br 3

HIT DICE: 5

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 orl

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d6 (x2)/1d4 or by weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Berserk frenzy

SPECIAL DEFENSES: _ Silver or magical weapons to hit
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: S (4° tall)

MORALE: Elite (13-14) or fearless (19-20)
XP VALUE: 650 (975 with magical weapon)

Werebadgers are dwarves that can transform into giant bad-
gers or dwarf-badger hybrids. In humanoid form they appear
to be normal dwarves with a silver stripe in their hair or
beards (not an uncommon trait among dwarves). In hybrid
form they stand upright, but have the features of a badger:
thick fur, enormous claws, and a badger’s head, In beast form
the werebadger simply appears to be a giant badger; trans-
forming into this shape rips apart any clothing the creature
wears.

The werebadger'’s claws are so large that they “clack”
together when not flexed or clenched.

Combat: This monster attacks with its foreclaws, followed by
a bite. Unlike the giant badger, the claws are actually more
fearsome than the bite, but only the bite can transmit the curse
of lycanthropy.

Unlike most lycanthropes, the werebadger has no qualms
about using weapons. Their natural weapons are so potent,
however, that only a magical weapon is of notable improve-
ment. They favor axes and war hammers, and there is a 75%
chance the creature owns a weapon (25% chance that it is mag-
ical). In animal form werebadgers cannot use weapons. Were-
badgers are harmed only by silver or magical weapons. The
oil of the poppy seed is poisonous to them.

During each round of combat, the werebadger has a 25%
chance to enter a berserk frenzy (roll before each round).
When this occurs, the beast froths at the mouth, its claw
attacks gain a +1 attack bonus, and its bite attack gains a +3
bonus. Once in a frenzy, it will not break off the attack until
either it is dead or until all its opponents have fled or died. To
make matters worse, during the frenzy, all bite attacks have
double the normal chance to transmit lycanthropy.

Habitat/Society: Werebadgers tend to live on the fringes of
society (when they choose to live among others at all). They
choose professions that allow them to be alone or excuse

 

 

 

 

 

bursts of violent anger. For example, many become scouts or
skirmishers in dwarf armies. Werebadgers dislike physical
labor as a rule. They typically do not work stone or metal.

Werebadgers dislike other forms of lycanthropes, but do
not hate them. Those that avoid dwarf society tend to be lon-
ers, living in caves and tunnels, preying upon the unsuspect-
ing. If one encounters another werebeast, the werebadger
would fight only to defend its territory.

On rare occasions a werebadger will be found with a mate
and young. Treat the young as common badgers with lycan-
thropic immunities. Any sign of hostility on the part of intrud-
ers will immediately throw both parents into a berserk frenzy
(no die roll necessary).

Ecology: This lycanthropy affects dwarves more readily than
other forms of humanoids. Gnomes, goblins, orcs and other
underground dwellers are half as likely to be infected as
dwarves. Humans, elves, and other surface dwellers are only
25% as likely to be infected.

Werebadgers do not live as long as dwarves. If allowed to
die of natural causes—a rarity for the species—they can live to
be 80 or 90 years old. Dwarves or other long-lived races that
are infected with this form of lycanthropy have the remainder
of their life spans halved. A prematurely old dwarf or gnome
is sometimes suspected of being a lycanthrope.

 
Lycanthrope, Werejaguar

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical /subtropical jungle
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night
DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)
TREASURE: D
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 4
MOVEMENT: 15

HIT DICE: 5+2
THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3or]

 

DAMAGE/ATTACK:
SPECIAL ATTACKS:

1d3 (x2)/2d4 or by weapon
Rear-claw rake

  

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Hit only by obsidian weapons,

or by +1 or better weapons

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: M (6’-7" long)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 975

Werejaguars are humans (or demihumans) who can trans-
form into three distinct forms: that of a human, a large
jaguar, and a hybrid form that combines the features of both
human and jaguar. The creature’s human form is fairly unre-
markable, although its hair might be sandy and streaked
with black or vice versa, and its movements generally are
fluid and graceful. The animal shape resembles a large jaguar
perhaps 7 feet long from nose to rump. The hybrid aspect
combines animal and human features: broad snout, black-
marked sandy pelt, wide paws that retain opposable thumbs,
and a long, expressive tail.

Combat: In human form the werejaguar can wield normal
weapons. In man-beast form it can use a weapon or attack
using a claw/claw /bite routine. In animal form it cannot use a
weapon. In either hybrid or animal form, if a werejaguar suc-
cessfully bites a victim, it can then rake with its rear claws for
an additional 1d4/1d4 damage. Rake attacks receive a +4
bonus because the victim is partially immobilized.

In their animal and hybrid forms, werejaguars can be
harmed only by magical weapons or by those made of obsid-
ian. Wounds from all other weapons heal so fast that they
inflict no effective damage on the creature. Mercury—even in
trace amounts—is immediately fatal when ingested.

If a werejaguar dies, it reverts to human form in one round.

Habitat/Society: If they live in the wilderness, werejaguars are
usually solitary creatures. When the occasional family group is
encountered, it will contain two adults and up to two off-
spring that are 1d6 x 10% grown. At 50% of full growth, off-
spring fight as adults; otherwise, the adults protect their
young with their lives, and they avoid encounters with adven-
turers and other hostiles.

Some werejaguars enjoy living in villages or small towns,
but they are commonly uncomfortable in larger settlements

 

 

 

 

 

(towns with a population of over 100, for example). Bearing
this loose limitation in mind, they frequently prove very adept
at infiltrating human society. In town, werejaguars can easily
set aside their solitary tendencies and cooperate with others
for as long as necessary. However, a werejaguar who has infil-
trated human society will increasingly yearn to seek out an
isolated area in which to relax and be alone.

Werejaguars do not marry, but they do have preferred
mates. Females typically mate only with other werejaguars.
Males often impregnate human females and leave the area
before the women realize the fell nature of the children they
carry.

Ecology: Werejaguars are pure carnivores, and they subsist
only on freshly killed meat. Although they greatly prefer the
flavor of human and demihuman flesh, they can subsist on
animal prey if necessary.
Lythlyx

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any remote land or water
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary or group
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Lawful neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1 or 3d6
ARMOR CLASS: 1
MOVEMENT: 6, Fl 12(A), Sw 8
HIT DICE: 5+6
THACO: 15
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: See below
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: | Nil
SIZE: H (14’-21' long)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 2,000
PSIONIC SUMMARY:

Level Dis/Sci/Dev Att/Def Score

PSPs

9 4/4/12 PsC,0,MT,PB/M,IF TW 10 210
Psychokinesis—Sciences: create object; Devotions: animate
object, control flames, control sound, create sound, molecular
agitation.

Psychometabolism—Devotions: body equilibrium, suspend
animation.

Psychoportation—Sciences: summon plant creature, teleport;
Devotions; teleport trigger.

Telepathy—Sciences: psychic crush; Devotions: id insinuation,
mind thrust, psionic blast, telepathic projection.

These strange, eel-like creatures are sometimes called “spirals”
because of their appearance. They are almost always found in
remote areas, dancing in midair or underwater. When moving
they resemble spinning corkscrews, and they often dance in a
particular place for years at a time. Lythlyx have long, worm-
like bodies about as thick as a human thigh. Their skin is rub-
bery, oily, and flexible, and is a mottled green and black.

Combat: Lythlyx are aggressive, but attack apparently at
whim, sometimes ignoring easy prey and going after stronger
or more numerous creatures. They use their bodies as whips
(2d6 flailing damage), or drop their coils about prey with
lightning speed and constrict (3d6 damage per round), or
drain blood (1d4 damage per round per mouth). A lythlyx
may use only one of these attack modes in a round, although
(size and situation permitting) it may use its chosen attack
mode against several opponents. There are 20 sucker mouths
along the body of a lythlyx. It reaches satiation when it has
absorbed double its maximum hp-worth of blood, at which
time it pulls away from a victim.

Blood taken in is converted to energy within two rounds,
which is used to heal and regain lost hit points at the rate of 1
per 4-hp worth of blood ingested, A lythlyx that heals itself

 

 

 

 

diately feed up to satiation level again. Lythlyx killed violently
often explode, spraying blood about.

Lythlyx will flee more powerful foes if an opportunity
exists, but will fight to the death if cornered. They use their
psionics only if they lose over half their total hit points, or if
psionics are used within 90 feet of them (note that their pow-
ers can whisk them away from most dangers). Lythlyx are
immune to charm, command, fear, hold monster, and sleep.

Lythlyx are not found on the ground by choice, and they
thrash about if forced to earth. In the air they spin 50 or more
times per round and can hover while spinning. They can also
dive (fall) at twice their listed speed (MV 24), spinning to steer
with great accuracy. If the spinning of a lythlyx is ever
stopped, it falls helplessly to the ground. Air resistance turns
and slows a frozen lythlyx so it suffers only 1 point of damage
per 10 feet fallen when it hits the ground.

Lythlyx have no distinct head or eyes, but can see with 90-
foot-range infravision through sensitive areas scattered over
their body surface. They seem unaffected by pressure
extremes.

Habitat/Society: Lythlyx cannot speak and seem to be bisex-

ual, giving live birth to young who swarm with the parents,
feeding voraciously until full grown, whereupon they usually
go their own way. Lythlyx seem to live for hundreds of years.
Some sages believe that they are a stage in the life cycle of ten-
tacled monsters such as tentamorts, ropers, or gibbering
mouthers, and others believe them to be related to couatl, or to
be part of the cyclical existence of certain dragons.

Ecology: A lythlyx absorbs sunlight and moisture through its
skin and is able to go without a blood meal for long periods of
time. The oil distilled from its flesh is used in the manufacture
of certain magical inks and oils. The taste and odor of lythlyx
seem to make them a last-resort meal for most predators.
Magebane

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tombs, ruins, subterranean
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Magical energy
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral
NO. APPEARING: l

ARMOR CLASS: See below
MOVEMENT: 6, Fl 12(A)

HIT DICE: 2+4

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: l
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4+2
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Tail whip
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below
SIZE: $(1%' long, 3° wingspan)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE:

These mysterious creatures inhabit tombs, ruins, and caverns.
They resemble large black bats with needlelike barbed tails
and cold, blue, glowing eyes. Their bodies are amorphous, but
always have 10 or more long, spidery black claws on the
undersides. They feed on magic and attach themselves to
powerful spellcasting individuals, to whom they soon become
almighty nuisances.

A magebane is immune and invisible to psionics (which it
in turn cannot detect), but it can see magical auras and cast
spells up to 160 feet distant. A magebane is normally invisible
to all beings except its chosen spellcaster.

A magebane shadows its chosen mage, flitting about
nearby and usually behind him. Whenever the wizard casts a
spell, there is a 60% chance the magebane will rob the spell of
either all (1 or 2 on 1d6) or part (3-6 on 1d6) of its energy. If all
of the energy is drained, the spell is lost and has no effect (sim-
ilar to the effect of a rod of absorption), When only part of the
energy is drained, the spell takes effect with lessened force,
having one or more of the following modifications: the spell
has minimum duration; the spell inflicts minimum damage;
targets of the spell gain a bonus of +2 or more on their saving
throws; the spell affects a lesser area or volume of matter.
Spells of 7th level and greater are largely immune to the feed-
ing of most magebanes, being only partially drained with a
roll of 1 on 1d6, and being otherwise unaffected.

Magebanes are silent and do not seek to reveal themselves
to their chosen spellcaster (as they are most easily seen and
slain by that being), so their presence may be unknown to the
chosen one and any companions for some time.

Combat: Magebanes never attack their chosen ones, instead
taking an interest in their safety. A magebane may swoop
down invisibly to rake anyone menacing its chosen one with
its claws (its usual attack) or slash with its razor-sharp tail (for
2d4 damage). It fades momentarily into view as it’s striking

 

 

 

 

 

and then vanishes again.

The Armor Class of a magebane is 5 to the spellcaster and
others who can see it (by means of a frue seeing spell); to oth-
ers, the unseen magebane is AC 1 (at the moment of its strik-
ing in combat). A magebane is 75% resistant to all magic cast
at it, except by its chosen spellcaster—it is 100% resistant to
the magic of its chosen being. A magebane seems unable to
anticipate even obvious spell effects, read the intentions of a
spellcaster, or recognize any spell by its casting process. It may
be affected by a non-attack, area-effect magic launched by its
chosen one (such as darkness), if it does not happen to absorb
the spell.

Habitat/Society: A magebane may choose another spellcaster
if it encounters a more powerful one than its present chosen
being. Otherwise, it must be slain for a chosen spellcaster to be
free of it. A magebane seldom moves from one member of an
adventuring band to another, even if the ranks of a party
include a far more powerful wizard than the one it’s presently
attached to, for they seem to shun the presence of former cho-
sen ones.

Magebanes seem to absorb and require only moisture, light
and heat, and magical energy. They live only to accompany or
search for chosen ones. They reproduce seldom, when they
encounter another magebane, whereupon both abandon their
chosen ones to enter a month-long process that results in each
bisexual parent bearing 1d3 live young four months later.

Ecology: Predators that eat bats also prey upon magebanes if
they can detect or catch them. Alchemists and mages use
magebane flesh in many magical and experimental processes,
and will pay 400 gp or more for a largely intact carcass.
Marrashi

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Jungle /desert
FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Carrion

INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)

TREASURE: B

ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil

NO. APPEARING: 1d3

ARMOR CLASS: 5

MOVEMENT: 12, Fl 27(B)

HIT DICE: 7

THACO: 13 (12 with missile weapons)
NO. OF ATTACKS: 3

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d2 (x2)/1d6 or by arrow type
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Missile weapons, disease

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Immune to missile attacks

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: M (5’ tall)
MORALE: Average (8-10)
XP VALUE: 2,000

The marrashi (plural: marrash), or winged archer, is an evil
spirit of pestilence that sometimes agrees to serve a wizard or
evil genie in exchange for treasure and the opportunity to
spread contagion. It has the dark wings of a vulture, the arms
and body of a human, the claws of a parrot, and the head of a
jackal. Its voice cracks and screeches. A marrashi is always
armed with a bow and arrows.

Combat: On the ground a marrashi is a weak fighter, attacking
with each clawlike hand for 1d2 points of damage and its beak
for 1d6 points of damage. Marrash prefer to use their bows
while airborne, by holding the bow with their talons and
pulling back the string with their hands. This gives them addi-
tional power in each shot. It also gives them an odd, tumbling
style of flight when shooting. Marrash can fire two shots per
round, and they never suffer range penalties.

Marrash arrows may be barbed or diseased. Barbed arrows
inflict 1d8 + 2 points of damage each. Diseased arrows cause
1d6 + 2 points of damage and require a saving throw vs. petri-
fication. A failed save means that the victim has contracted a
fatal disease and will die in 1d20 days unless treated by a cure
disease spell, cast by a cleric of 7th level or higher, or a charac-
ter with the healing proficiency makes a successful check at a
penalty of -5. Any person exposed to the infected character
must make a successful saving throw vs. petrification each
day or also become infected until the affliction is cured.

Marrash can increase their numbers by firing taklif arrows.
These special projectiles infect their victims with a disease that
appears to be identical to the one spread by the diseased
arrows described earlier, although the course of the disease is
always much swifter—the victim of a taklif arrow dies in a day
if untreated. Bless, cure disease, and dispel evil in combination
are required within six hours to heal the afflicted victim. After
six hours, the course of the disease is irreversible, short of a
heal or limited wish spell (these also cure the disease completely

 

 

 

 

 

in its earlier stages). A marrashi never has more than one taklif
arrow ata time, and these are almost always used on human
or demihuman targets; marrash bred from other races rarely
survive.

The spirit of a victim struck by a taklif arrow is devoured by
a growing marrashi presence, and when it is entirely eaten, the
victim dies and the new marrashi begins to slowly transform
the corpse. Victims of a taklif arrow cannot be brought back
with a raise dead or resurrection, though a properly worded wish
is effective. If simply buried, the body becomes a new mar-
rashi in 1d6 days. The marrashi, having fed on the spirit of the
transformed body, sometimes retains some of the memories
and personality of the deceased. Its alignment, if not already
lawful evil, shifts to that alignment in stages over the next 1d3
weeks. If cremated, the embryonic marrashi dies.

Habitat/Society: Marrash are usually confined to the Outer
Planes, but they can be summoned to the Prime Material by
wizards knowledgeable in the art of commanding their ser-
vice. Once summoned, they always seek to increase their
numbers without the knowledge of the mage who conjured
them so that the newborns may, in time, avenge their parents’
servitude. These newly created marrash are always the result
of taklif arrows, and they must fend for themselves from the
moment they shed their hosts’ skins. They grow quickly and
nourish themselves to maturity in desolate places, stealing
carrion from vultures and ambushing lone travelers to create
more of their own kind.

Ecology: Marrash are servitor creatures on the Prime Material
Plane and have few effects on any ecology there, except when
their plagues decimate city populations.

 
 

Metalmaster (Sword Slug)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any land
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary or hunting group
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore, scavenger
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1 or 1d4

ARMOR CLASS: 6

MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 4+4 to 6+6

THACO: 15 (4+4 or 5+5), 13 (6+6)
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 3d4

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Magnetism

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE; _ Nil

SIZE: H (12’-25" long)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 650 (4+4), 975 (5+5), 1,400 (6+6)

The metalmaster is a large, leathery-skinned sluglike monster,
dull purple to rust-red in hue (rarely, smoky-gray or black),
with large sawlike teeth that can bite through metal.

A sword slug can mimic vocal sounds previously made in
its presence. It uses these to lure prey, but its low intelligence
often causes it to emit the wrong sound for the situation.

Combat: A metalmaster generates powerful magnetic fields at
will, effective to 30 feet (60 feet if affecting an existing mag-
netic field). It affects enchanted and normal metal equally, but
does not influence traces of metal in rock or unrefined ores. In
one round the metalmaster can attract or repel, then instantly
stop or switch between attraction and repulsion at the round’s
end.

Attraction draws small, unsecured metallic objects toward
the slug (small, secured objects may be taken if the devices
holding them fail to save vs, crushing blow). Attracted objects
smaller than a sword or medium-sized shield are pulled at the
rate of 20 feet per round; larger unsecured objects are dragged
5-10 feet per round, and if secured (or are as massive as a large
anvil or a metal throne), can’t be shifted. Magically held or
secured objects can’t be moved, and magical barriers (such as
a wall of force) stop moving items.

Repulsion deflects even partially metallic missiles so they
don‘t hit intended targets. Metal-armored beings must make a
successful Strength check each round or be forced at least 10
feet away from the slug; those who only wear or carry metal
weapons, coins, belt buckles, and the like also must make a
successful Strength check (with a bonus to the roll determined
by the DM) or be likewise affected. Grasped metallic items
suffer —-4 attack penalties while repulsed, and the wielder must
make a successful Strength check or the object tears free.

A metalmaster’s power can’t be avoided by the use of blink,
jump, or similar spells, and it extends into the Ethereal Plane
(though dimension door and similar magic does allow escape).

 

 

 

 

 

The slug’s magnetic field causes no damage by itself, but
affected weapons often strike unintended targets.

Attracted objects never strike its body, but orbit around it.
In the 10 feet closest to a slug’s body (and up to 30 feet away),
a whirling storm of metal rages, akin to a blade barrier spell.
Creatures in this area suffer 4d6 points of damage each round
unless they are magically shielded. A successful Dexterity
check allows them to sustain only 2d6 points of damage.

A metalmaster’s teeth can shear through hardened armor,
but it does not otherwise harm metal. Metal pieces acciden-
tally ingested do it no harm, but a sword slug doesn’t eat
metal.

Metalmasters can climb steep grades (but not vertical walls
or smooth inclines), can see with 90-foot infravision, and they
can sense the direction and approximate distance of fist-sized
or larger pieces of metal up to 40 feet distant. Given sufficient
food, they regenerate rapidly. Lost hit points are regained at
the rate of 1 per turn, and a severed eyestalk might regenerate
in a day or two.

Habitat/Society: Metalmasters have been known to live a cen-
tury or more. They are usually solitary, banding together to
hunt in dangerous areas and withdrawing into deep tunnels
or muddy bogs to mate, choosing inhospitable places so that
few will disturb them. Sword slugs lair near metal if they can,
and favor small, narrow tunnels. They often lurk near hoards
of metallic treasure, which attracts prey and provides the
metalmaster with ready-made missiles for combat.

Ecology: Metalmasters prefer to eat large, red-blooded prey
(such as livestock and adult humans), but in a pinch will eat
almost any living creature or carrion. The flesh of a metalmas-
ter is so bitter that only carrion-eaters will feed upon it.
Alchemists and mages have experimented with metalmaster
ichor and flesh, but have not thus far found a use for them.
Mimic, House Hunter

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Young Adult Ancient
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any land Any land Any land
FREQUENCY: Rare Rare Rare
ORGANIZATION: Pack Pack Pack
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any Any
DIET: Carnivore Carnivore Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Semi (2-4) Low (5-7) Average (8-10)
TREASURE: Nil ],.K,L,M (,K,L,M,N,Q)x10,5
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Neutral Neutral
NO. APPEARING: ld4 1d6 1d4
ARMOR CLASS: 0 (shell), 0 (shell), 0 (shell),
6 (tentacles and tongue) 6 (tentacles and tongue) 6 (tentacles and tongue)
MOVEMENT: 3 3
HIT DICE: 10 20
THACO: i ]
NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 1d4+2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2d6 3d6 4d6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Mimicry, continuous damage Mimicry, continuous damage Mimicry, continuous damage
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Camouflage, heat and cold Camouflage, heat and cold Camouflage, heat and cold
resistance resistance resistance
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil Nil

SIZE: L (10° tall)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE:

House hunters are large relatives of mimics. They have lost
some of the latter’s camouflage versatility, but they have
gained the ability to live above ground.

House hunters form, hard shells that look like stone, wood,
or thatch, lending the appearance of a building. Young house
hunters look like smaller structures such as outhouses and
sheds, adults are the size of cottages and small houses, while
ancient creatures are larger still, with elaborate shells that can
resemble inns, temples, or ruined towers. All three sizes of this
monster can produce dim, flickering light (bioluminescence),
resembling candle or lantern light, at any body opening, and
they can imitate domestic noises (muffled voices, clucking
hens, the tolling of a temple bell, etc.).

Bony plates resembling doors and shutters cover the shell
openings, protecting and hiding their mouths, eyestalks, and
huge tentacles—each specimen has a tongue that is 2 feet long
per Hit Die, two eyestalks that are 6 inches long per Hit Die,
and two tentacles that are 1 foot long per Hit Die. The bony
plates are opened and shut by the use of strong muscles that
function like those of clams. These apertures can be forced
open by making a successful open doors roll. There is a wide
variety in the locations of these openings: Some of these crea-
tures have them all along the fronts of the “buildings,” while
others have mouths and eyes at the front, but tentacles at the
left and right sides. Ancient house hunters often have extra
tentacles, which may be arrayed on all sides of the structure.

Adult and ancient house hunters can talk, but they only
speak a crude form of Common. Sages speculate that they
communicate telepathically within a 10-mile range.

Combat: A house hunter attacks by extruding its tongue and
limbs and wrapping those appendages around nearby victims

H (15’-20° tall)
Champion (15-16)

G (30’—40' tall)
Fanatic (17-18)

(one appendage per victim). Each extremity makes a separate
attack roll, suffering a —2 penalty if it is on a side that lacks an
eyestalk. A successful hit indicates the member has caught its
target, whereupon it will inflict damage at the end of that and
each ensuing round, continuing to do so until the victim
appears to be dead or breaks free. The caught character must
immediately roll a successful Dexterity check to avoid having
his or her arms trapped too—if the roll fails by more than 4,
both arms are pinned to the sides of the victim’s body and no
counterattacks are possible. If only one limb is caught, the DM
must roll to determine randomly which arm has been pinned
down, and thence whether counterattacks are possible.

The creature’s tongue and tentacles are covered with a
musty-smelling adhesive slime; those caught by any of those
appendages must make a successful Strength check in order to
break free. The victim may either attempt to escape or attack
(depending upon whether his weapon arm is free) in a single
round, but not both.

An unresisting opponent is assumed dead by the captor
house hunter, and the victim will be dropped after five addi-
tional rounds of constriction. Once all adversaries have been
dealt with, the bodies are picked up by the house hunter's
tongue and pulled into its mouth at the rate of one per round.
Victims lying along the blind side of the monster are taken in
first, followed by those along the sides with eyestalks. Anyone
pretending to be dead suffers one more round of constriction
damage as he is picked up, but he still has one last chance to
pull free in that round before being dragged inside the house
hunter.

Once inside the monster, only small, hand-held stabbing
weapons—the size of a short sword or smaller—may be used
to attack (consider the creature’s insides to be AC 10). If any

 
 

Mimic, House Hunter

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

damage is inflicted, the house hunter uses its appendages to
eject the person from its shell and then constricts him again
until he ceases to resist for five rounds, escapes, or the monster
dies. Bodies within a house hunter are fully digested and
unrecoverable after 1d4 turns.

Note that the tongue, eyestalks, and tentacles of the house
hunter are actually pseudopods; if any member is amputated
in combat, it regrows in 1d4 turns, and all damage sustained
by that appendage is returned to the creature’s hit point total.

House hunters aren’t damaged by sunlight, but they don’t
like to expose their flesh and eyes to it. Hence, they prefer to
travel by night, and they delay their attacks until after dusk if
possible. If forced to fight by day, they make all attacks with -2
penalties.

House-hunter shells are thick enough to reduce both nor-
mal and magical heat and cold damage by 1 point per Hit Die
of damage. If one’s hit point total falls below 10, it pulls in all
of its appendages, shuts all openings, and attempts to move
away from its attackers.

Habitat/Society: House hunters are pack animals, cooperating
to capture their prey. Young house hunters rarely attack until
an adult has taken the initiative. They all have good hearing
and can sense the vibration of footsteps of man-sized and
larger creatures that are 120 yards away. They are also intelli-
gent enough to delay their attack until they can reap the maxi-
mum reward. For example, they won 't attack a single scout if
there is a large party approaching behind.

The reproduction of these monsters remains a mystery,
though an adult has been seen digging a large hole in the earth
with its foot, then depositing its single live young in the hole.
The creature subsequently made its way out of that hole and
followed its mother. Shells apparently grow in size with their
owners, and they are shaped over long periods of time to
resemble particular buildings that the house hunters have

probably seen in their limited travels.

Ecology: Treasure is usually found inside a house hunter's
shell, either within the stomach or embedded in the shell wall.
Such treasure consists of the undigestible remains of the mon-
ster’s victims, including coins, gems, and similar small items.
Some treasure may be encysted in layers of shell, like pearls,
but these lumps have no jewel value. Occasionally, a magical
item or rare antiquity may be found within the monster. A
cursed item is especially possible, since those characters carry-
ing truly powerful weapons or items would be much more
likely to successfully repel the attack of a house hunter and
escape. Assume that adult house hunters have a 5% chance to
contain a magical item and that ancients have a 10% chance.
Further, such items found in either type are 60% likely to be
magically cursed.

The underside of a house hunter has no armor. It is a slip-
pery foot resembling that of a snail, though it isn’t especially
adhesive. When the creature moves, the outer shell raises
slightly to allow movement over open ground, debris, etc.

If cleaned out thoroughly, a house hunter’s shell can be
converted into a crude dwelling.
Naga, Bone

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any land
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary or groups (guardians)
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (15-16)
TREASURE: Any (as guardian)
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil

NO. APPEARING: 1 or 1d12

ARMOR CLASS: 6

MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 7

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: __1d4 plus special /3d4
SPECIAL ATTACKS: _ Spells

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE; Nil

SIZE: L (up to 12’ long)
MORALE: Fearless (19-20)
XP VALUE: 4,000

Bone nagas are created undead. They appear as skeletal
worms with humanlike skull heads that appear larger than
one would assume to be usual for their bodies. Their empty
eye sockets glow with the hatred of fell unlife. Created by dark
nagas (see the MONSTROUS MANUAL tome) and a few evil
mages to serve as guardians, these spellcasting worms serve
their masters with absolute loyalty. Their creation is an exact-
ing process, hence their rarity.

Bone nagas do not speak. They have limited (60-foot range)
telepathy, with which they communicate with their creator.
Though they can broadcast thoughts for others to receive, they
cannot use this as any sort of attack, and most of the time they
prefer to shield their thoughts from others, retreating behind a
screen of mental chaos whenever they feel another mind.

Combat: In battle, bone nagas bite with their long fangs for
1d4 points of damage, plus the victim must successfully save
vs. spell or suffer an additional 1d4 damage and lose 1
Strength point. (Creatures not rated for Strength suffer a —1
penalty to subsequent attack rolls.) Lost Strength returns at the
rate of 1 point per hour. Bone nagas also sting with their pow-
erful barbed tails, inflicting 2d4 points of physical damage
plus 1d4 points of chilling damage (no save allowed).

In addition to their physical attacks, bone nagas can cast
one spell per round. They work magic as a 6th-level wizard
(4/2/2), but these spells are cast by silent force of will and do
not require verbal, material, or somatic components. A bone
naga’s spells are set when it is created and cannot be changed,
but whenever one is cast, it returns without study exactly 20
hours later. Bone nagas can’t normally employ magical items,
but one may be fitted (by another creature possessing the nec-
essary limbs to do the work) with protective magical items
that are worn.

Typically chosen spells are magic missile (x4), blindness, flant-
ing sphere, and lightning bolt (x2).

 

: 5 Tvs

Ht FIN)

Like most other undead, bone nagas are immune to charm,
death (related), hold (and related), sleep, and cold-based spells.
They are also immune to poison, but they suffer 2d4 points of
corrosive damage per vial of holy water that strikes them.
Acids and venoms do not harm bone nagas, and they are also
immune to the effects of gases and other attacks that affect the
respiratory system.

Bone nagas attack creatures with psionic powers whenever
they recognize such ability, and they cannot be compelled by
anyone except their creator(s) to cast spells. Attempts to do so
psionically will result in temporary confusion on the part of
the bone naga, coupled with great anger at the source of the
mental assault.

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Bone nagas are usually created by the nagara
(evil nagakind, or dark nagas) to be guardians, especially of
young nagas and nonmagical treasure. If their creators are
destroyed or abandon them, their loyalty ends and they travel
freely in the world. Such rare bone nagas may be found in
ruins, subterranean areas, and deep woods, often surrounded
by lesser undead they have gathered around them.

Ecology: Bone nagas eat nothing and fill no niche in any life
cycle, save that they sometimes kill large, aggressive natural
predators (including humankind) for sport or to practice with
their spells. Some mages have found uses for their powdered
bones in magic involving telepathy. Bone-naga powder can
also be used as a substitute for powdered iron (by wizards) or
unholy water or smoldering dung (by priests) when making
the circle for a protection from good spell (without altering the
spell’s casting or effects in any way).
  

Nautilus, Giant

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any sea
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Genius (17-18)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: I

ARMOR CLASS: -3 (shell) or 3 (body)
MOVEMENT: Sw 18

HIT DICE: 14

THACO: 7

NO. OF ATTACKS: 21
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d8 (x20) /Sd4
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: = 20%

SIZE: G (50'+ diameter)
MORALE: Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: 15,000

The giant nautilus is a native of the Elemental Plane of Water.
It has also been encountered on Thalasia, a layer of Elysium;
the ocean Lunia, on the first layer of Mount Celestia; and on
Arborea, in the depths of Poseidon’s realm, On the Prime
Material Plane it wanders the depths of the deepest oceans.

In appearance the giant nautilus seems to be but a gigantic
version of its diminutive cousin. The creature is often called
the “druid of the deep” because of its neutral alignment and
insistence upon maintaining balance in the underwater world.
The giant nautilus considers a sunken ship a terrible eyesore
and actively helps in its removal, usually by protecting those
removing the ship from the fearsome predators of the depths.
The creature is uninterested in treasure of any kind, but it is
not completely naive; it has a basic understanding of avarice
and greed. Therefore, the nautilus demands that sunken ves-
sels carrying more mundane cargo be removed before it
allows the removal of a sunken treasure ship. It also demands
the removal of the entire ship, not just the cargo.

The giant nautilus has a form of telepathy that allows it to
communicate with any intelligent creature, regardless of lan-
guage barriers.

Combat: Twenty strong tentacles encircle the creature's
mouth. It can grab and constrict opponents with these tenta-
cles while bringing the unfortunate victims into its huge
mouth, The mouth is large enough to swallow a man-sized
creature whole on a natural attack roll of 18 or better. The
mouth can also bite for 5d4 points of damage.

Depending on the attacker's size, the nautilus can bring all
20 tentacles to bear on a single opponent or it may elect to
attack 20 separate targets. It generally uses three tentacles per
man-sized target. Any character constricted by a tentacle may
have one arm (01-50%), neither arm (51-75%), or both arms
(76-100%) pinned down. A constricted character cannot cast
any spells, but can strike the constricting tentacle with a -3

 

 

 

 

 

attack penalty (one arm free) or a —1 penalty (both arms free).
Each rubbery tentacle cannot be broken by force and requires
15 points of damage from a sharp or edged weapon before
severing. (Severed tentacles regenerate in about one week.)

The nautilus can drag a small ship below the water and can
stop the movement of a larger one after one turn of winding
its tentacles around the ship and dragging. If six or more ten-
tacles squeeze a hull for three consecutive rounds, the vessel
suffers damage as if it had been rammed and begins to sink.

This creature uses the following spell-like powers, one per
round, at will: charm person or mammal; conjure water elemental
(3 times per day); control temperature, 10’ radius; detect evil/good;
detect magic; know alignment (always active); locate fish or plants;
lower water; monster summoning I, IL, and III; part water; wall of
coral (stone).

Habitat/Society: The giant nautilus is a solitary wanderer of
the depths and maintains no lair. It has a natural life span of
3,000—4,000 years. Sages speculate the creature uses magic to
return at times to the plane of Water, to reproduce.

The nautilus is on good terms with most of the underwater
races, including the sahuagin and ixitxachitl. In fact, the giant
nautilus is often used by the tritons, mermen, and locathah as
an impartial judge to mediate disputes. For all its peaceful
intent, the giant nautilus puts a stop to anyone overfishing a
particular location or polluting the sea, first through negotia-
tion, then by warning, and finally through force.

Ecology: The giant nautilus preys on huge crustacea such as
giant crabs and lobsters. It has no natural enemies, but is
sometimes in conflict with the kraken (see the MONSTROUS
MANUAL tome). The shell of the giant nautilus is a great
prize. It can be converted into a roomy, virtually crush-proof
submarine.
Nightshade

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any forest or cave
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Tribe

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Blood and bones
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: B,X

ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil

NO. APPEARING: 1d4 or 3d10

ARMOR CLASS: 7

MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 1+4

THACO: 19

NO, OF ATTACKS: ]
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4+1 or by weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spells, poisonous sap
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Spells, immune to wooden

wea pons

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (4° tall)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 270

Nightshades, or wood woses, are elemental spirits of poisonous
plants like mistletoe, hemlock, foxglove, and belladonna. They
live in dark, unhallowed forests and caverns.

Nightshades oddly resemble sylvan dwarves with dark
brown skin. They are stocky but supple and as flexible as
reeds or willows. Their thick beards and thatchlike hair are
full of vines and leaves. They wear only kilts and vests of
woven fibers, and they carry weapons of beaten copper or
bronze.

Nightshades speak their own tongue, the languages of
plants and fungi, and the language of quicklings.

Combat: In combat, nightshades wield bronze spears or short
swords. They are immune to wooden weapons like clubs, bo
sticks, and staves; even magical shillelaghs or enchanted
staves are useless. Nightshades suffer double damage from
fire.

Wood woses use their sap to poison blades, though the poi-
son becomes inactive after 10 rounds of contact with air. It
takes one round to poison a blade, and unless a victim makes a
successful saving throw vs. poison, the substance reduces the
victim’s Dexterity by 1 per hit. When a victim’s Dexterity
drops below 3, he is rendered immobile. When it reaches 0, he
dies and becomes a nightshade following the next full moon.

Nightshades can cast speak with plants and pass without trace
at will as well as entangle and plant door once per day. In
groups of six or more, there is always a nightshade mage who
has the spell powers of a 5th-level druid. A group of seven or
more nightshades can summon a shambling mound once per
month; to recite the magical words of the summoning spell,
the wood woses must first drink blood. The summoning takes
six turns, and thereafter the nightshades command the sham-
bling mound all night.

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Nightshades in the wild are elusive night-
time hunters. By day they retreat into hollow logs, caverns, or
other dark places to hide from the sun. They mate for life,
though most mated pairs produce no more than two offspring.

Nightshade outposts take the form of dark, echoing groves.
They dwell in small foraging groups and are seminomadic,
leaving their groves when the forest is silent. They grow rings
of poisonous plants, twist trees, and clog forests with mistle-
toe.

Wood woses are cold and uncaring creatures. They capture
trespassers for sacrifices to their high queen, and particularly
dangerous prisoners are kept sedated. Nightshades are not
greedy; gold and gems mean little to them. Magical potions
and poisons, however, are greatly prized.

Nightshades are only active during the growing season.
During fall they become sluggish, eventually crawling into
dark lairs where they hibernate all winter.

The nightshades’ high queen is Ainecotte, the oldest and
most intelligent one of them all, She has the powers of a 7th-
level druid and rules through terror and blackmail.

Ecology: Nightshades eat the blood and bones of living crea-
tures. Their numbers rarely increase naturally—usually they
are created by druids or by priests dabbling in necromancy
and the dark arts of venom and unnatural growth, as well as
through the transformation of poison victims.

Nightshades’ only enemies are treants, druids, and rangers,
who root them out like weeds. No natural predator will eat a
nightshade after the first bite (except hook horrors). Night-
shades are on good terms with korred, needlemen, and evil
myconids. They trade poisons to the quicklings in exchange
for weapons.

 
 

Nishruu

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any

 

 

 

 

 

 

FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Magic
INTELLIGENCE: High (13-14)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 10

MOVEMENT: 6

HIT DICE: 9

THACO: 11

NO. OF ATTACKS: 0
DAMAGE/ATTACK:;: Nil

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Absorb magic
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below

SIZE: L (12’-diameter sphere)
MORALE: Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: 2,000

These weird creatures are believed to come from an alternate
Prime Material Plane. Known to sages of old as Eaters of Magic,
they feed on magical energy and are greatly feared for the
damage they can do.

Nishruu appear as silent, amorphous bodies of red, breath-
able mist, lacking visible organs or features. They glow, puls-
ing regularly as they drift about, and can seep through
finger-width cracks. They will always move toward the great-
est concentration of magic within 60 feet.

Combat: Aside from their effects on magic, nishruu inflict no
damage to objects or beings. Physical attacks and nonmagical
fire affect this creature normally, and hits are automatic if an
attacker is enveloped by a nishruu. Magical cold- and fire-
based attacks inflict half damage when launched from outside
the monster, but they cannot form wit/tin a nishruu. Further-
more, those magical attacks from outside the nishruu are
absorbed after inflicting just one round of damage.

Nishruu ignore physical attacks, moving fearlessly and
relentlessly toward sources of magic. Mind-control spells and
illusions do not affect them. Any spell (other than those men-
tioned above) cast at a nishruu is absorbed by it, having no
effect except to give the creature life energy equal in hit points
to the damage the spell normally inflicts. A nondamaging
spell gives a nishruu extra hit points equal to its spell level.

Chargeable magical items are drained of 1d4 charges upon
contact with a nishruu, and if contact is continuous, the drain
occurs again at the end of every second round. Nonchargeable
magical items have their powers negated for 1d4 rounds after
contact. If used when in contact with a nishruu, the effects of
potions and scrolls suffer a delay of 1d4 rounds after contact
ceases.

Artifacts become inoperational at all times while in contact
with a nishruu, and for one round after contact ceases. Spell-
casters of all classes who are enveloped by a nishruu lose one

 

 

 

 

 

memorized spell (determine randomly) at first contact and
one per round of contact thereafter. Each time a loss occurs,
the spellcaster must make a successful saving throw vs. breath
weapon or become feebleminded (as the spell) for 1d4 rounds.

Habitat/Society: Nishruu are solitary creatures that are not
native to the Prime Material Plane. They cannot voluntarily
transfer magical spells or charges to another being. Salt, both
rock and sea, is deadly poisonous to nishruu—a handful of
flung salt typically inflicts 2d10 points of damage upon a
nishruu. Salt can therefore be used to confine or herd such
creatures, for they will not willingly come into contact with it.

Ecology: Nishruu feed on magic, drifting endlessly and relent-
lessly about in seemingly aimless searchings for it. These crea-
tures can actually detect the presence of magical energy within
600 feet or so, and they will always move toward the most
powerful, plentiful, or nearest source of magical energy. No
upward limit for energy absorption is known, nor is a nishruu
known to have starved from lack of magic. Most sages believe
that sunlight and moisture may also sustain these beings.

When a nishruu is slain its body dissipates, losing luminos-
ity and hue and appearing to sink into the ground. Any magi-
cal item within its body area when it is slain, or any magical
weapon slaying it, even if no longer within the body, receives
a magical bonus of 1d6 additional charges (or a second use in
the case of items that can normally be used but once, such as
arrows and scrolls). Potions, memorized spells, artifacts, and
items that do not have charges will not be augmented.
Noran

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Subterranean
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 2
MOVEMENT: 3

HIT DICE: 945
THACO: 11

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d8 (x2)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Projectiles

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 30%

SIZE: L (11' tall)
MORALE: Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: 2,000

The noran, although a rather ridiculous-looking creature, is one
of the more fearsome monsters one can find underground. It
looks like a sickly, petrified treant, with knots and holes covering
its entire surface and a face hidden in the trunk. It has two long,
whiplike prehensile branches with which it can pick up small
items. Finally, it has a cavity on its top that extends down into its
main body, which narrows until it ends in a knothole.

Norma! dungeon creatures leave the noran’s area alone,
moving away if one comes into the area. By keeping careful
watch on it and keeping themselves hidden, the creatures can
slowly return after it passes on to greener pastures.

Noran speak a rudimentary form of Common and can also
communicate haltingly with other forms of tree, including tre-
ants.

Combat: Obviously, the noran’s prehensile arms pose a threat,
for they can strike at a range of up to 10 feet with frightening
speed. However, the noran’s arms should be the least of any
opponent's worries, for the creature carries a far more devas-
tating weapon concealed in its body.

The knothole just below the noran’s mouth can open and
close and fire fist-sized rocks at frighteningly high speeds. It
feeds these rocks to itself by picking them up with its prehen-
sile arms and dropping them into the cavity on top. Rocks
fired this way inflict 2d8 points of damage. It can fire one rock
per round, provided it forgoes other attacks. The range for an
accurate spit rock is 60 feet. However, it can store up to 10
rocks in its cavity before combat. If it has done so, it can both
fight with its arms and spit rocks at its opponents. If it so
desires, it can fight two opponents within reach and fire a rock
at a third.

Because it is made of a petrified material, the noran suffers
normal damage from fire-based attacks, but it doesn’t con-
tinue to burn like other, ordinary wooden monsters would.
However, it suffers double normal damage from bludgeoning
weapons.

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: The noran is a solitary, nomadic creature.
Since most prey flees the area when a noran arrives, it must
constantly be on the search for more food. It therefore stays in
an area only as long as other creatures stay, and moves on
when they do.

Despite the fact that they are solitary, norans will not fight
others of their kind they meet. Instead, they usually take the
opportunity to reproduce. How they do this is unknown, but
both norans leave the encounter bearing an acorn. For one
year after this takes place, the noran cannot fire rocks, but after
that time the noran ejects an infant, which must then fend for
itself. It has all the statistics of an adult noran from the point it
is born.

Ecology: It is surmised that norans are distant relatives of the
treant, although how they came to occupy the underground is
an explanation best left to a trained sage.

As noted, the noran is carnivorous. It eats any fleshy crea-
ture it can kill. It prefers its food bruised and bloody, making it
more tender and thus more easily digestible when the noran
shuffles over it. The proteins of living flesh are the only ones
concentrated enough to nourish a noran. The ordinary diet
(for a plant) of sunlight, soil nutrients, and water is simply
lacking in the ingredients necessary for a noran to survive.

Any treasure or undigestibles left on a victim’s body when
consumed by the noran are spit out and left to lie on the
dungeon floor. Those retracing a noran’s steps can often find
useful items along the way, though they might have to fight
other dungeon scavengers for said treasures. Some creatures
actually prosper by following in a noran’s footsteps. However,
they all too often find that this course leads to doom if the
noran decides to retrace its own steps.

 
Ophidian

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical jungle, underground
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Clan

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low to very (5-12)
TREASURE: U

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral
NO. APPEARING: 3d4

ARMOR CLASS: 5 (base)
MOVEMENT: 9, Sw 18

HIT DICE: 30r4

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2

 

 

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d3 and by weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Camouflage

MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: M (5-6' long)
MORALE: Unsteady (5-7)

XP VALUE: 3 HD—175, 4 HD—270

 

 

 

Ophidia, or snakemen, look like large snakes with humanoid
arms and hands, but they aren’t long and slender like true
snakes. They are usually mottled green and yellow in color.
Ophidia have their own language, and about half of them
know Common or another language spoken by nearby races.

Combat: Ophidia have a chameleonlike power to change col-
ors. Their scales can assume brown and gray tones, as well as
their normal green and yellow, so they can blend into subter-
ranean environments as well. This blending ability imposes a
-2 penalty upon opponents’ surprise rolls, and ophidia use
this to good effect in preparing ambushes.

For every three normal snakemen encountered, there will
be one present with 4 Hit Dice. These stronger ophidia do not
lead the others, but do tend to bully them a bit, hissing out
orders and providing some plan of attack.

About 90% of ophidia carry weapons, and 50% use shields.
Roughly half carry swords, 30% use clubs or maces, 10% carry
battle axes, and 5% use scourges. The remaining 5% may carry
any type of weapon that can be used with one hand. They
attack twice per round, once with a weapon and once with their
bite. A bitten human, demihuman, or humanoid victim must
make a successful saving throw vs. poison or be afflicted by dis-
ease: 1d4 + 1 days after the bite, the victim's skin grows scaly.
The legs begin to shrink, and the tongue becomes forked. After
two weeks, the victim becomes an ophidian with 4 HD.

Those affected by the disease gradually lose their memo-
ries, becoming more snakelike every day. Cure disease and
remove curse halt the affliction, though neither is effective
alone, A heal spell or regeneration, wish, or limited wish is
required to reverse the disease. Once the transformation is
complete, nothing short of a wish will return the victim to the
previous state.

Habitat/Society: Wild ophidia live in small family groups. The
eldest female usually leads the group, and she determines

 

 

 

where the group hunts and what alliances they make.

Ophidia are sometimes enslaved by yuan-ti, and they often
serve nagas or green or black dragons. In fact, they are rarely
found in groups without a powerful non-ophidian leader of
some kind. Some form uneasy alliances with lizard men, but
they never share living areas with them. Ophidia are friendly
with snakes and are often found with a giant constrictor.

Snakemen have little in the way of religion, though groups
often “worship” the naga, dragon, or giant constrictor snake
with whom they associate, bringing food and presents to them.

Ophidia can mate at any time during the year. Females ini-
tiate the ritual with a writhing dance that hypnotizes males.
About two months after mating, the female lays 1d6 + 1 eggs
in a shallow hole, then covers them. The eggs harden slowly
and hatch in about three months. If a whole nest survives to
adulthood, they form a new family group. Others generally
join with a group of snakemen in the area, either a wild group
or one in servitude to a greater monster.

When an ophidian is created through a bite, it feels com-
pelled to travel to the area where it was bitten. This compul-
sion begins when the transformation is half complete, and the
soon-to-be snakeman sneaks off, fighting for freedom if
caught. When the new ophidian arrives at the area where it
was bitten, any local clan will adopt it.

Ecology: Ophidia are dangerous predators, stalking and
ambushing any sort of warm-blooded prey. They prefer
smaller animals, but like true snakes they can unhinge their
jaws. This enables them to swallow dead animals up to 3 feet
long. Snakemen generally serve to keep the populations of
small animals down, though certain groups have been known
to acquire a taste for halflings.

Ophidian poison becomes inert a few minutes after it
leaves the snakeman’s body, so cannot be used to pass the dis-
ease,
Opinicus

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any surface ruins
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Very to exceptional (11-16)
TREASURE: A

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic good

NO. APPEARING: 1-2

ARMOR CLASS: -2

MOVEMENT: 21, Fl 30(B)

HIT DICE: 747

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d3 (x2)

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spells, rear-claw rake
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Spells, gaze

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: = 35%

SIZE: M (3° tall, 12° wingspan)
MORALE: Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 14,000
PSIONICS SUMMARY:
Level Dis/Sci/Dev Att/Def Score PSPs
5 2/3/10 All/ All per ability 150

Psychoportation—Sciences: probability travel, teleport; Devo-
tions: astral projection, dimensional door, dimension walk,
dream travel, teleport trigger, time/space anchor.
Psychokinesis—Sciences: telekinesis; Devotions: animate
object, control wind, inertial barrier, levitation.

For purposes of psionics, opinicus have a Constitution of
Lo.

An opinicus (the term is plural as well as singular) is a desert-
dwelling creature of good will. It is an odd-looking creature,
seemingly a blend of several creatures. This friendly psionic
beast looks like a camel with an eagle’s wings, a monkey's face
and hands, and a lion’s mane and tail. Its forepaws have
opposable thumbs that can be used to grasp and wield objects.
Most opinicus are colored a light buff to a golden brown with
slightly darker faces and wings.

Though some sages suggest the opinicus is one of the clas-
sic “mad wizard’s experiments,” it is a breed unto itself, and
an ancient one at that. Most speak an older dialect of Com-
mon, though some of them hint they have a language of their
own; if so, it is never spoken around other creatures.

Combat: Opinicus seek to avoid combat in most cases, but are
adamant opponents of evil. They attack all evil creatures and
have a special hatred of undead and al-Jahar (q.v.), attacking
any of those monsters on sight. Opinicus fight sometimes to
aid a good cause.

Opinicus have very keen senses and are never surprised.
They are also stealthy, and opponents suffer a —-2 penalty to
surprise rolls, —5 if the opinicus is in its home environment.

Despite its rather ridiculous appearance, the opinicus can
be deadly in combat, diving at opponents when space permits.
It attacks using its front claws, and if both front claws hit, or if

 

 

 

 

 

the opinicus is flying, it also rakes with its rear claws, inflicting
1d6 additional damage apiece.

Opinicus also have spellcasting abilities and spell-like
powers. They have the spell capacity of a 7th-level cleric with
a Wisdom of 18 and they can turn undead. Each can also cast
holy word and heal, each three times per day. Though mainly
for defensive purposes, some of their spells can be used offen-
sively as well.

Opinicus can become ethereal at will (as per plate mail of
etherealness) and use this ability to flee or become insubstan-
tial. They also have several transportation-related psionic
powers.

In addition to their other powers, opinicus have a glowing
sun sparkle gaze, which emanates in a cone shape 20 feet long
and 10 feet wide at the base. Once per turn, an opinicus can
use the gaze to harm undead and creatures of the Lower
Planes, who suffer 2d8 points of damage per attack (half if
they roll a successful saving throw vs. spell).

Though opinicus usually save their psionic powers for
traveling and playing pranks, they use them for self-defense if
pressed. Inertial barrier and dimension walk are of particular
use in self-defense.

Habitat/Society: Opinicus usually live in old ruins such as a
deserted city, palace, or temple. They are occasionally encoun-
tered elsewhere, usually on some mission for a good cause.
Despite the creatures’ penchant for joking and playing pranks,
good creatures seldom refuse their aid.

Since opinicus are so ancient (often living for centuries),
they are assumed to be an ancient, beneficial race. Some folk
say they were summoned from the Outer Planes to battle evil.

Ecology: Opinicus have little impact on their environment,
though they sometimes clean the ruins they inhabit, or they
create works of art, usually sculpture.

 
 

Ormyrr

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any nonarctic, nondry land
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Tribe

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)

TREASURE: R,V (Z in lair only)
ALIGNMENT: Lawful neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1di2

ARMOR CLASS: 5

MOVEMENT: 11, Sw 15

HIT DICE: 74+7

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 5

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4+1 (x4) or by weapon/2d4

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Hurl rocks, constriction
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: H (up to 25’ long, 10° tall)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 975

Some sages believe these seldom-glimpsed creatures are
natives of another plane. An ormyrr is pale-mushroom white
to dun in color, with a purplish underbelly. It looks like a giant
upright worm with two pairs of arms projecting from a pow-
erful torso, topped by a fang-mouthed, froglike head. Ormyrr
give an overall impression of great strength and can wield
weapons with all four arms without getting tangled up in
their own attacks. They are always eager to seize weapons
when they can, and if found bearing magical items, it is 80%
likely that these will be weapons that the ormyrr will use.

Combat: Ormyrr fight with their long-taloned hands or use
them to hurl missiles, including large stones, which they hurl
up to 40 feet, smashing foes for 2d6 damage each. They also
wield weapons (typically waving pairs of axes or swords).
Note that an ormyrr’s hand can swing a two-handed weapon
without penalty. Ormyrr also bite with fearsome force, inflict-
ing 2d4 points of damage upon a successful hit.

In any round in which an ormyrr strikes the same foe twice,
the victim must make Strength and Dexterity checks. If both
fail, the ormyrr automatically rolls over that opponent and
will constrict on the following round. The squeezed victim
suffers 2d6 damage per round, and thereafter attacks with a -1
penalty and suffers a -2 penalty to damage rolls. A Strength
check is allowed each round to break free.

If they can get them, ormyrr like slings, weighted nets, mil-
itary forks, or tridents, but they cast these aside to attack foes
with four blades at once when close. They dislike spellcasters
and will seek to disable opponents who obviously have magic
first. Some ormyrr wear necklaces of the linked skulls of crea-
tures they've slain—the braincases are often used to store sling
stones and other small weapons or items (such as caltrops or
darts).

 

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Ormyrr are amphibious and hibernate in
mud at the bottom of deep lakes or go out to sea in the cold
months. They den at the bottom of small lakes throughout the
North, but prefer to hunt on land, roaming far afield (up to 40
miles) from their lairs.

Ormyrr live and hunt in tribal bands that keep to them-
selves and do not make war on other tribes. The sex and tribal
affiliation of an ormyrr are immediately obvious to another
ormyrr (probably by scent), but all ormyrr look identical to
human eyes.

Ormyrr are fascinated by magic and are working hard to
develop magic of their own—something they seem to have no
aptitude for at all. One of the great dreams of ormyrr is to
attain the power to fly, either by growing wings, by breeding
wings into the race (mating attempts with wyverns and other
creatures have been a series of disasters), or by seizing and
duplicating enough magical items that give the power of flight
so that every ormyrr can have one.

When useful magic is to be had, the normally placid
ormyrr become avaricious and crafty in the extreme. Ormyrr
have even been observed to worship human deities of magic,
although they have gods of their own (depicted as giant,
winged ormyrr with boulders held in their outstretched
hands).

Ecology: Ormyrr are great enemies of yuan-ti and harpies,
both of whom they attack on sight. Ormyrr live on a varied
diet of plants, birds, reptiles, and mammals, but usually avoid
attacking beings of intelligent races. They seem immune to
many poisons (+4 to all poison and venom saving throws).
Several alchemists and sages are interested in studying
ormyrr, but no uses have yet been found for ormyrr body
parts or substances.
Parasite

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Bloodring Ear Seeker Goldbug Wizard Lice Vilirij
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any land Urban, ruins Any land Urban Urban
FREQUENCY: Very rare Very rare Rare Rare Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary Nest Nest Nest Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any Any Any Night
DIET: Blood Wood, carnivore Blood Spells Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Non (0) Non (0) Non (0) Non (0) Semi (2-4)
TREASURE: Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Neutral Neutral Neutral Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: 1 1d4 1d20 I nest 1
ARMOR CLASS: 10 9 9 0 5
MOVEMENT: 1 1 1 1/10 3, FL 6{A)
HIT DICE: is 4 (1 hp) 1 1 per nest 141
THACO: Nil Nil 20 Special 19
NO. OF ATTACKS: Nil Nil 1 Nil 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: Nil Nil 1d4 Nil 1d4
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Blood drain Burrowing Blood drain, poison Spell draining Blood drain
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Disguise Nil Disguise Weapon immunity Disguise, poison
MAGIC RESISTANCE: = 30% Nil Nil 10% Nil
SIZE: T(1"-12" long) T(6” long) T-S(1’-3' diameter) T (1/16” long) T (3°-6" diameter)
MORALE: Fearless Unsteady (5-7) Average (8-10) Fearless (20) Average (8-10)
XP VALUE: 65 15 120 120 270

Parasites live in or on other organisms, feeding upon them in
some manner, yet returning little or nothing. Common para-
sites are usually just nuisances, though they can cause compli-
cations; they are easily killed by a cure disease spell. Presented
here are several uncommon parasites.

Bloodring ‘

This small worm has metallic skin and four eyes that look like
tiny red gems, It coils into the shape of a ring and waits for an
intelligent creature to wear it. Once donned, the bloodring
drains 1 point of blood per hour, up to a maximum of 6 points
per day, using most of its energy to power its magic resistance,
but it also grants half that resistance to its host. A well-fed blood-
ring grows | inch per week to its maximum size of 1 foot.

Ear Seeker
This is a small insect normally found in wood, where it eats
dead cellulose. However, it needs warm places to lay its eggs,
and it prefers human or humanoid bodies, especially ears.
When an adult enters an ear, it lays 1d8 + 8 tiny eggs and then
crawls out to die. The eggs hatch 4d6 hours later, the larvae bur-
row into the surrounding flesh, and generally head inward.
The host cannot feel the eggs, but hatching causes a tingling
sensation, and burrowing is painful. The parasites cause 1d4
points of damage per round until the host dies. A cure disease
spell kills the eggs or larvae, but does not heal any damage.

Goldbug

This beetle has a flat, circular body and a golden, contoured
shell that makes it look like a gold piece. Eyes, antennae, and
legs are on the underside of the body; when legs and antennae
are folded, the bottom looks like an oddly designed gold
piece. Examination fails to reveal the bug’s true nature 50% of
the time, unless the handler uses magic or, for example, if the
handler bites the creature to determine if it is real gold.

The goldbug usually rests in a nest with others of its kind,
or on a bed of real gold pieces, until someone takes it. The
goldbug waits until its host sleeps, then tries to suck his blood.
A bite hits a sleeping victim automatically, with a 10% chance
the victim wakes up. Blood is drained at a rate of 1-3 points
per round, until the goldbug drains the equivalent of its own
normal hit point total. It can go long without eating, but
prefers a meal once a day.

If disturbed or threatened, the goldbug has a poisonous
bite that inflicts 1d4 damage. Victims must roll a save vs. type
F poison with a +3 bonus to their roll (see the DMG).

Wizard Lice
These harmless-looking creatures are difficult to see. They join
a host by jumping from another. Though they're harmless in
small numbers, in a week they breed enough to form a nest
that allows them to feed on their preferred food: spells. When
they infest a wizard or priest (or even their clothing), they
remove one spell from the spellcaster’s memory, once each
day. The spell is chosen at random from all those memorized.
Wizard lice cannot be removed by simple bathing. Washing
with strong soap or another powerful cleaning agent kills
them. A cure disease spell is also effective against them.

Vilirij

The vilinij is a flat creature that looks like a patch of skin. It
flies at night looking for likely victims, sometimes waiting
above doors or on ceilings. When a potential host is near, the
creature lands on exposed skin (preferring a seldom-seen area)
and adheres there. It injects a poison that anesthetizes the
wound and affects the victim’s mind, preventing the victim
from noticing the vilirij. Others see the creature as a patch of
discolored skin. It sucks blood from the victim at a rate of 1d4
points per day until removed. The creature is easily recog-
nized by those who have dealt with it before.

 

 
 

Pasari-Niml

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Warrior Noble Calipha
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any land Any land Any land
FREQUENCY: Uncommon Rare Very rare
ORGANIZATION: — Squad Squad Colony
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any Any
DIET: Special Special Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Avg (8-10) Very (11-12) Very (11-12)
TREASURE: Nil Nil R,Q(x2),S
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil Lawful evil Lawful evil
NO. APPEARING: 3d4 1-2 1
ARMOR CLASS: 4 4 10
MOVEMENT: 12, Br 3 12, Br3 1
HIT DICE: 1 2 3-6
THACO: 20 19 3—4 HD: 17
5-6 HD: 15
NO. OF ATTACKS: 2 2 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-2orwpn Id3orwpn 1
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Fearaura, Fearaura, Fear aura
burrowing burrowing
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Seebelow Seebelow See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil Nil 25%
SIZE: T (4°-6") T (6"-8") T-S (1'+4’)
MORALE: Elite (14) Fanatic (18) Unstdy (5)
XP VALUE: 270 420 3 HD: 270
4 HD: 420
5 HD: 650
6 HD; 975

Pasari-nimal (sometimes called mants) are horrid, tool-using,
insectoid predators. They appear to be very large black ants
with human heads. A pasari-niml’s head has pointed ears,
bulging eyes, and a long face distorted by malevolence and
evil. The skin on the head is wrinkled and brown. It has six
legs, two of which can wield weapons or tools.

Pasari-nimal stay in contact through telepathy that is gen-
erated and received by their antennae only. The telepathy can
be used within | mile of the calipha.

Combat: Upon first seeing a pasari-niml, creatures with Hit
Dice equal to or less than that of the monster must roll a save
vs. spell. Those failing are frozen in place until attacked. Those
who succeed flee at their top movement rate for 1d3 rounds.
Creatures of higher Hit Dice must roll a successful save vs.
spell or flee at their top movement rate for 1-2 rounds.

Pasari-nimal always travel in squads of both warriors and
nobles. They attack in an organized manner, directed by the
nobles, who are in constant mental contact with the colony’s
calipha (queen). When a squad sights potential prey, the nobles
send a few warriors to test the opponents, analyzing their
attacks and defenses. The entire squad then attacks in concert.

Several climb onto a victim, and as many as eight can attack a
man-sized creature. They burrow under and around armored
individuals, creating a pitfall in one round. When the ground
collapses, a victim must roll a successful save vs. paralyzation or
be trapped in 1d3 feet of dirt. A trapped enemy is attacked by
burrowing pasari-nimal, who cut and pry at armor to make a
hole (which takes 1-2 rounds). Afterward, a single pasari-niml
attacks the vulnerable area while others make more holes.

If a squad faces dangerous or numerous opponents, they
call for reinforcements; 1d4 additional squads arrive in 1d4 + 1
rounds. If necessary, the mants pull back and wait.

All warriors and nobles carry two darts and a small knife.

 

 

 

 

 

Most pasari-nimal also carry tools such as pry bars and awls.
Pasari-nimal are immune to all enchantment/charm spells.

Habitat/Society: Pasari-nimal live in large colonies containing
6d4 x 10 warriors, 1d20 + 20 nobles, and a calipha. They often
live under human cities, burrowing in the ground and in walls
of houses, sending out raiding parties at night. In the wild,
warriors and nobles dig a burrow for their calipha and then
construct an ever more elaborate palace above it. At any time,
1d4 squads patrol the outer reaches of the colony.

The calipha keeps a selama (a male harim) of nobles and
reproduces rapidly, each day laying as many eggs as she has
Hit Dice. Eggs hatch in three weeks, and approximately one in
eight produces a noble. Once a year, a 6-HD calipha produces
a calipha egg that hatches in three weeks, and a squad carries
the new calipha several miles away and starts a new colony.

Pasari-nimal worship their calipha, performing rituals and
carving her face into burrow and castle walls.

Ecology: Pasari-nimal are disruptive to a local ecosystem,
preying on any animal or monster. Warriors and nobles bring
food to the calipha, who digests and regurgitates some of it to
feed them. If the calipha dies, the lesser pasari-nimal die in 1-2
days. If all warriors and nobles die, the calipha can last three
days per Hit Die, during which time new mants may hatch.

Only very sturdy predators prey on warrior or noble
mants.

Calipha
A calipha exists to eat, receive worship, and reproduce. She
has a beautiful, if small, female human head with long tresses
and large, feathery antennae. Unfortunately, this spark of
beauty is situated on an ugly, mottled, wormlike body.

The calipha has only a weak bite to defend herself, and her
legs are small and weak. She cannot use tools, and she moves
by wriggling. A queen grows 1 HD and 1 foot per year.
Plant, Vampire Moss

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Swamp, woods
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Colony
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Life energy (hit points)
INTELLIGENCE: Non (0)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1d6

ARMOR CLASS: 9
MOVEMENT: 0

HIT DICE: 4 (4 hp)
THACO: Special

NO. OF ATTACKS:

1 (special)

 

 

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1 hp per round
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: — Nil

SIZE: T-S (14 long)
MORALE: Average (8-10)
XP VALUE: 7

Vampire moss hangs from trees and branches in marshy or
tropical environments, waiting for other creatures to wander
past it so that it can feed upon them.

This plant is normally pale green in color, and it grows toa
length of 1 to 4 feet. The moss grows in a netlike mass, but it is
not as thick as that which grows upon rocks.

Combat: Vampire moss lives upon the life energy of other
creatures, but it prefers mammals—especially intelligent ones,
possibly because their living essence tends to be more vibrant.
The moss is an “air feeder,” meaning it requires no contact
with other creatures in order to draw life energy from them. A
victim need only pass within 10 yards of the moss in order to
be “attacked.”

When vampire moss attempts to feed on a person, he feels
a prickling sensation at the back of the neck; at that point, the
character must make a Constitution check (by rolling his Con-
stitution score or lower on 1d20). If the check succeeds, the
moss is unable to establish a feeding link, but it will continue
to try to magically attach itself until the intended victim leaves
its area of effect, requiring subsequent Constitution checks
each round until that happens. If and when the victim fails a
check, the moss is able to “latch on,” and it immediately
begins feeding at the rate of 1 hp per round until the victim
dies, until he leaves the area, or until the moss has consumed
four times its own hit-point total in life energy (16 hit points),
at which time it is sated and releases its victim. If several vam-
pire mosses attack a single character, the damage can mount
quickly; these creatures always attempt to establish feeding
contact with the nearest being.

If a victim is reduced to half his or her maximum number
of hit points as a result of the vampire moss’s feeding, he must
make another successful Constitution check or fall uncon-
scious. Even if the victim makes a successful check, he must
continue to make checks each round until the draining stops

 

 

 

 

or unconsciousness. (Of course, the Dungeon Master should
not at any time inform the character why the checks are neces-
sary or what the results of failing them are until they occur.
Nor should the DM identify the source of the energy drain.)
The victim dies when reduced to 0 hp.

Meanwhile, as the moss feeds, it turns a brighter and
brighter shade of green. A fully sated moss is a vivid emerald
green.

The only ways to kill vampire moss are by ripping it into
tiny shreds or by burning it. The moss regenerates all other
damage at a rate of 2 hp per week.

Ecology: Vampire moss serves no particular purpose in the
ecology of the swamp or forest; it’s more of a parasite than
anything else, Unfortunately, it does not die if deprived of
higher life forms upon w hich to feed—the moss can even feed
upon the life energies of nearby trees, but it only does so if on
the verge of starvation.

Vampire moss may be used as a component of energy
draining magic such as cursed potions of harm (reverse of heal-
ing) or rings of weakness.

 
Pteraman

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Jungle

FREQUENCY: Uncommon

ORGANIZATION: Tribe

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Omnivore

INTELLIGENCE; Average (8-10)

TREASURE: P (individual), E (in lair)

ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil

NO. APPEARING: 1d10 («10)

ARMOR CLASS: 4

MOVEMENT: 12, Fl 12(C) with wings, Fl 21(B)
as pteranodon

HIT DICE: 4

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4 (x2)/1d6+1 or by weapon

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Swoop

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

 

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: L (10’ tall)
MORALE: Fanatic (17-18)
XP VALUE: 270

From a distance, pteramen are often mistaken for lizard men,
but they are larger and leaner. The scales that cover their torso
and most of their arms and legs are small and smooth like the
skin of a snake. Pteramen range in color from olive green to
forest green to shades of tan. Their hands are long and end in
sharp nails used for rending opponents. Their feet are clawed
also, which aids in climbing. Their most startling feature is
their leathery webbed wings, which don’t appear until the
creatures plummet in flight. Pteramen can will their wings to
appear and disappear, often in a manner to throw opponents
off guard.

In effect, pteramen have three forms: that of a lizard man
with no tail, a lizard man with webbed wings, and a miniature
pteranodon with a 15-foot wing span. This third form is
achieved by a natural polymorph ability. No matter the form, a
pteraman’s attacks and damage remain the same.

Scholars speculate that pteramen are precursors of lizard
men, and that a group of them did not evolve. Adventurers
who have encountered the creatures disagree, believing they
are enchanted relatives of pterodactyls. In either case, adven-
turers and scholars agree that pteramen are more vicious and
mean-tempered than lizard men, and they seem bent on cru-
elty. Indeed, the pteramen are vicious and self-centered, think-
ing only of themselves and their tribe.

Combat: Pteramen care little for elaborate strategy, although
they have been known to plan raids on small villages. The rep-
tilians prefer to fight by their natural instincts, swooping
down upon opponents to quickly gain the upper hand. When
encountered in smaller groups, pteramen are prone to fight
with their claws and bite. While in larger and more organized
bands, they employ weapons such as great barbed spears.
Often pteramen circle opponents, coming at them from all
directions to keep them from forming a defensive position,
They almost always attempt to employ a swoop attack: A

 

 

 

 

 

 

pteraman attains an altitude of 100 or more feet and then dives
on an opponent, ramming the target with claws or a weapon.
Any successful hit inflicts double damage, and the victim
must make a successful Dexterity check or fall to the ground.

Pteramen’s favorite opponents are goblins, whom they
consider competition for jungle land.

Habitat/Society: Pteramen found in groups of 10 to 30 do not
recognize a ruler, but are a chaotic group governed by the
loudest, most powerful individuals. Such groups are avoided
by other bands of pteramen, who do not want to get involved
in petty squabbles over property, valuables, and food. Larger
groups of pteramen are more structured, usually patterning
their society after the nearest humanoid tribe.

No matter the size of the group, all pteramen communities
tend to look the same: a collection of huts high in thick-
trunked trees. From the ground it is often difficult to see these
homes, as thick vegetation obscures the pteramen’s handi-
work. Each hut houses from one to four pteramen. If more
than one is found in a hut, it will be a mated pair and its off-
spring. Pteramen mate for life and care for the children until
they are old enough to go off on their own. These children
leave the tribe and search for a new group to join, as parents
don’t want their offspring around to compete for food and
valuables.

Ecology: Pteramen are omnivorous, but adults favor freshly
killed meat. Their enemies are many, including goblins, ptero-
dactyls and pteranodons, the latter of which prey on small
groups of pteramen.
Rautym

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Underground
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Pack
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: 4d10
ARMOR CLASS: 3
MOVEMENT: 15
HIT DICE: 444
THACO: 15
NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d6 (x2) /1d8
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil
SIZE: S (4' tall)
MORALE: Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: 1,400
PSIONICS SUMMARY:

Level Dis/Sci/Dev Att/Def Score PSPs

5 2/1/6 Nil 13 70

Clairsentience—Devotions: danger sense, feel sound, hear
light.

Pyschometabolism—Sciences: shadow-form; Devotions: adren-
alin control, aging, chameleon power.

The rautym resembles a small, eyeless, hairless, freckle-backed
monkey. It is never found far from its companions, not
because it is fearful, but because rautym gain power by being
together.

Although rautym have no eyes, they nonetheless have little
trouble existing in the dark. This is because two of their
psionic powers, feel sound and hear light, are always active,
and without cost in PSPs. They maintain small quantities of
faintly phosphorescent rocks all about their lairs, or on their
persons if traveling, which they use for psionic beacons, aid-
ing in navigation. If plunged into magical darkness and
silence, the rautym panic and attempt to flee. Opponents can
use these spells to defeat the rautym easily; this is an option
few have tried, however, as it is not at all obvious upon meet-
ing these eyeless creatures.

Combat: The rautym have exceptional control over their
psionic abilities and use them to great effect during combat.
When they encounter danger, they use their adrenalin control
to boost their Strength (they already have a natural Strength of
15), so they gain attack and damage bonuses. If necessary, they
use shadow-form to sneak up on their enemies, at which point
they employ aging or simply leap out upon their enemies to
engage them in fierce hand-to-hand combat.

In addition to their arsenal of psionic powers, the rautym
also have a power that is unduplicated in any other known
race: they can dance magic, that is, they can summon magical
energies by dancing in a certain way. There must be at least

 

 

 

 

 

two rautym for this to work: One acts as the dancer while the
other acts as the focus. A lone rautym dancer must dance five
hours to produce a single Ist-level spell, while the focus is the
one who casts the actual spell. The focus must have heard of
the spell to cast it, and there must be at least twice as many
dancers as there are spell levels for spells past 5th level (e.g., a
6th-level spell requires 12 dancers). The focus need not decide
on the spell until the time comes to cast it, and there have been
cases where the rautym dance for days, building the magical
energies to an unheard-of level.

Additional rautym reduce the casting time or increase the
spell level. The specific amount of time depends on the num-
ber of dancers: five hours divided by the number of dancers.
The increase in spell level is one level per rautym until 5th
level, at which point there must be two rautym per level. For
example, two rautym dancers can enable a focus to cast a 2nd-
level spell after five hours of dancing, or can enable it to cast a
Ist-level spell in two and a half hours. Likewise, five rautym
can cast a 5th-level spell after five hours of dancing, or can
decrease the casting time of a Ist-level spell to one hour.

If possible, the rautym dancers post sentries who use their
chameleon power and danger sense. Since the rautym cannot
defend themselves while they dance (although their dancing
reverie is broken when the circle is broken), they prefer to
have sentries rather than the extra power.

Habitat/Society: Rautym have a traditional focus, usually
their elder, who leads them through the darkness, There is at
least one elder per group of four. If the previous elder is killed,
a new one is created to take its place. The rautym are never
without a focus.

Ecology: The rautym are an anomaly. No one is sure of their
origins, but most know that disturbing a circle of dancing
rautym is a sure way to invite destruction.
  

Shadeling

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any shadowy area
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Pack

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Twilight, early morning
DIET: Living shadows
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil

NO. APPEARING: 1d10

ARMOR CLASS: 0/as duplicated form
MOVEMENT: 18/as duplicated form
HIT DICE: Special /as duplicated form
THACO: Nil/as duplicated form
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1/as duplicated form
DAMAGE/ATTACK: Special/as duplicated form
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below

SIZE: Special

MORALE Fearless (19-20)

XP VALUE 1,400/ variable

Shadelings are bizarre and dangerous denizens of the demi-
plane of Shadow. They are often compared to dopplegangers,
for they seek to mimic the forms of others and then kill them.
In their natural form they are flowing, sentient shadows about
the size of a human, but irregular in shape.

Combat: Shadelings possess the power of duplication. The
shadeling engulfs its victim’s shadow if the unfortunate fails a
saving throw vs. breath weapon. Once this is done, the shadel-
ing takes the victim’s material form. The victim’s weaponry and
armor are duplicated as well, although duplicated magical
items cannot be magical themselves. The shadeling immedi-
ately gains all the physical abilities of its victim, including hit
points, Armor Class, and special physical attacks and defenses.

Once a shadeling has taken a material form, it attempts to
slay the being it has duplicated. If it manages to do so, it
remains in its new form for 2d10 days. Then it returns to its
true form and must find another victim.

In its true form, the shadeling cannot be physically harmed
and is unaffected by most spells. Both light and darkness spells
have a 5% chance per level of the caster to destroy the shadel-
ing, and the continual versions of these spells have a 10%
chance per level of the caster. Dispel evil and protection from evil
spells affect shadelings normally, and a shadow walk spell cast
upon them destroys them automatically, as does the sunray
spell. A holy word uttered at a shadeling in physical form
causes it to revert to its true form, while a holy word uttered at
a shadeling in shadow form banishes it to the demiplane of
Shadow. If killed while in the form of some other being, the
shadeling returns to its shadow form, but it loses the power to
duplicate for a full day.

Note that although they may resemble undead, shadelings
cannot be turned by priests. However, they are elemental
beings and are subject to spells and other magic that affects
other creatures from the Inner Planes.

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Shadelings seem to have only one purpose;
to duplicate living beings and feed on their shadows.
Although they are found in groups of up to 10, they don’t
appear to work together to accomplish any goal. Indeed, they
will all attempt to steal the form of a single being, without any
sense of strategy or hierarchy. Sages speculate that they exist
in numbers only because they escape the demiplane of
Shadow together, probably through elemental vortices.

Ecology: Shadelings have no natural place in the ecology of
the Prime Material Plane, and nothing is known of their role
in the demiplane of Shadow. However, various wizards have
found some uses for these creatures in the workings of
magic: Any mirror that has been prepared by casting enchant
an item and permanency spells on it, and which is subse-
quently engulfed by a shadeling, will instantly become a mir-
ror of opposition.
Skum

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical,temperate subterranean
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Brood

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Animal to average (1-10)
TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil

NO. APPEARING: 2d4

ARMOR CLASS: 7

MOVEMENT: 6, Sw 15

HIT DICE: 2+2

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: )

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2d8 / 1d6 (x2)/1d8 (x2)

SPECIAL ATTACKS:

SPECIAL DEFENSES:

Nil
Nil

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below
SIZE: M (4’-6’ tall)

: Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 175

Skum are a race bred by the aboleth (see the MONSTROUS
MANUAL tome) from humanoid genetic stock to serve as beasts
of burden. Skum do not resemble their ancestors. They have
an aboleth-like tail and four extremely strong limbs, each end-
ing in a webbed paw which has two fingers and an opposable
thumb. Each digit ends in a retractable claw. A skum’s body is
covered with a clear, slimy, hairless, gray-green membrane.
While they have no external ears, they are not deaf. In the
water, they can hear twice as well as a human can in air. A
skum’‘s eyes are much like an aboleth’s—an eerie shade of
purple-red—but are more spherical. Having been bred to
function in the dark, skum have 60-foot infravision.

Combat: Skum are pure fighting machines and can attack
three opponents at a time, though they usually choose to
attack a single enemy. Skum males have an effective Strength
of 18 and females have 18/50 Strength. Water is their natural
element, and when in water they can attack with their bite and
all four limbs. On land their bodies are clumsy, so they suffer a
—2 penalty on attack rolls and can use only their bite and arms
in melee. While in the presence of an aboleth, skum fight until
they are victorious, slain, or ordered off by the aboleth. Skum
can be trained to use weapons, but only awkwardly; skum
fighting with a weapon suffer a —2 penalty to their attack rolls.

In water a female skum can carry as much as a heavy war
horse if the load is strapped to her back; males can carry as
much as a medium war horse. On land, a skum can carry as
much weight as a human with the same strength.

Habitat/Society: Skum are the result of at least a millennium
of careful breeding. They no longer resemble humanity in
body or mind. The aboleth removed what they regard as
unnecessary parts: vocal cords, lungs, external ears, hair, etc.
The aboleth then added what features they thought would be
necessary for their servants, such as the tail for swimming and

 

 

 

 

 

 

claws and teeth for fighting. Most skum have low Intelligence
(5-7), but some have been bred to be even less bright.

Skum tend to be as coldly logical as their limited intelli-
gence allows, and they have almost no emotions. They com-
municate with their aboleth masters and with each other
through a limited form of telepathy (range 30 yards) that
allows them to understand simple commands. Skum telepa-
thy does not allow communication with races other than skum
or aboleth. Their minds are susceptible to mental domination.
They get no saving throw vs. the aboleth’s enslavement power
and they save vs. all other enchantment/charm spells at +.

Ecology: Skum breathe through the skin, but their outer mem-
branes must be moist to do so. A skum out of water can
breathe normally for half an hour before drying out and suf-
fering 3d4 points of damage each turn.

A skum female lays one egg at a time after a gestation
period of about six months. The egg must incubate on land for
four to six weeks, so the female usually buries it in sand. If
possible, the parents remain nearby to ‘guard the egg. Once
hatched, the baby skum is nursed like a human infant and
reaches maturity in three years. Only about 25% of the eggs
laid mature into adults. Skum can live to be about 30 years of
age, but most die in combat much sooner than that.

Skum have no natural enemies, but most land dwellers
despise them. A skum captured by drow or duergar is in for a
long and painful death. Svirfneblin usually take pity on skum
captives. Kuo-toa don’t hate skum, but no skum servant has
ever been observed in a kuo-toa city.

Skum will eat anything they can catch, and the aboleth are
not above letting them scavenge.

Although the aboleth cannot transform captive humanoids
into skum, they can change them so that their offspring will.

 
Snake, Giant Cobra

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any tropical
FREQUENCY: Common
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Animal (1)
TREASURE: Nil (W)
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: ld6

ARMOR CLASS: 8
MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 3

THACOD: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS:
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d8 plus poison
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Poison, charm

 

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: | Nil

SIZE: H (12°-24' long)
MORALE: Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: Giant: 270; elder: 975

Giant cobras are dimly intelligent snakes with hoods marked
by two eyelike patterns on the back. They may live as long as a
century and are said to gain wisdom in their old age, giving
them semi to low intelligence (2-7).

Combat: The giant cobra attacks by rising into a swaying pil-
lar, spreading its hood, and striking with blinding speed. Its 4-
inch fangs deliver a poison that kills in 2d4 rounds, but a
successful save at —2 results in only 10 points of damage.
Cobras can also sway in a mesmerizing way that charms crea-
tures of animal intelligence or less, effectively paralyzing them
for 2d6 rounds.

Giant cobras fear fire and will retreat from it, suffering a -6
penalty to morale checks when threatened with open flames.

Habitat/Society: Usually solitary, giant cobras mate once per
year in the early spring, often in a location where entire plagues
of serpents return year after year. After mating, the female cobra
lays a clutch of 2d10 eggs in a shallow pit and guards them until
they hatch, at which time the young are abandoned.

The population of giant snakes can increase rapidly, so
nests of giant cobras are destroyed by humans when discov-
ered. Giant cobra eggs bring 10-500 gp on the market, as they
are sought by snake charmers, assassins, or chefs.

Giant cobras live in burrows stolen from other animals;
these lairs sometimes contain incidental treasure from their
victims, but rarely anything of value. Elder cobras value glit-
tering objects and therefore have treasure type W.

The snakes are active in cycles; they warm themselves in
the sun and then hunt, then warm themselves again. In cooler
climates or during the monsoon season they may spend more
than half their time in their burrows or crevices. They never
hunt or fight at night, always fleeing combat in the dark.

Giant cobras are occasionally kept by snake-handling cults
and various groups of assassins. They are amenable to training,
though they always remain dangerous if not carefully handled.

 

 

 

 

 

Ecology: Cobras are powerful enough to kill and eat an entire
goat or a demihuman of up to halfling size. They tend to hunt
in binges, eating a large meal and then curling up in their lairs
for several days or weeks. They have few natural enemies;
some varieties of giant weasel hunt them successfully. Giant
cobras like the rich flesh of domesticated animals.

Giant cobra venom can be stored in daggers made to hold
the liquid in special channels, but it degrades rapidly. The vir-
ulent agent decays at a rate of +1 to the saving throw per turn.
After 20 minutes the save is made with no penalty; after a full
hour, the saving throw is made at +4; after two hours, the save
is made at +10. The poison is inert after three hours.

Elder Giant Cobra

Elder serpents are wise enough to know the value of stealth
and the power of intimidation. They can speak Common (with
a lisp) and the trade language of giants, and they are likely to
try to browbeat humans and demihumans rather than simply
attack them. The elder serpents can hypnotize and paralyze
not only animals, but people as well. A victim is allowed a
saving throw vs. paralysis to avoid being hypnotized for as
long as the cobra concentrates and for 2d6 rounds thereafter.

The elder cobra’s venom is more concentrated than that of
its younger brethren (onset of death 1d4 rounds, save at —4).
Victims of its bite who successfully save suffer 10 points of
damage, but they are paralyzed for 1d6 rounds.

Elder serpents gain an additional Hit Die and suffer no
modifier to morale when faced with open flames.

The largest of the elder serpents is called the Grand Snake-
master, and is said to be immortal. When it sheds, the dis-
carded skin is rumored to possess healing powers. Those who
eat of it are said to gain wisdom, but since the Grand Snake-
master has never been seen, the truth is questionable.
Snake, Stone

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: _— Subterranean

FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Minerals

INTELLIGENCE: Animal (1)

TREASURE: Q (x5)

ALIGNMENT: Nil

NO. APPEARING: 1-2

ARMOR CLASS: -2

MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 8

THACO: 13

NO, OF ATTACKS: 1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2d10 or 1d8

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Poison

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Immune to fire and poison,
4 damage from edged and

piercing weapons

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: H (20’~25' long)
MORALE: Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 2,000

The stone snake is similar to its mundane cousins, except its
body is made up of segments of a stony mineral that resem-
bles granite. It is this hard outer body covering that provides
the stone snake with its exceptional Armor Class. Its color
generally ranges from eggshell to rosy pink, with striations of
mauve to black—similar to most colors of granite.

Combat: The stone snake attacks with a lightning-quick jab of
its blunt, stony snout, inflicting 2d10 points of bludgeoning
damage. Alternatively, the stone snake can make a bite attack,
causing 1d8 points of damage and injecting a virulent poison
into its victim, who must make a successful saving throw vs.
petrification with a -6 penalty. If the saving throw is failed, the
poison takes effect, slowly petrifying the victim over five
rounds.

Because the stone snake’s body is so hard, it can withstand
the blows of most weapons fairly well, hence its low Armor
Class. Edged and piercing weapons inflict only one-quarter
damage upon a stone snake.

Habitat/Society: Stone snakes are found individually or in
mated pairs. The female stone snake lays 1d6 eggs in the early
fall and then watches over them while the male scavenges for
food for the both of them. The eggs themselves are very simi-
lar in color to the parents, and roughly 16 to 18 inches long.
When the young hatch, they are white in color, slowly devel-
oping camouflaging hues over the first six months, at which
point they are driven from the nest to survive on their own. A
stone snake yearling is typically 10 to 12 feet long, and its poi-
sonous bite is somewhat weaker; the saving throw penalty for
these younger specimens is only —2. Stone snakes of this age
typically hunt smaller creatures such as giant rats and beetles.

Even though the main diet of a stone snake consists of min-
eral matter, certain types of gems seem to be undigestible by it,

 

 

 

 

 

and these are typically found in the lair among the refuse.
Gems that are not digested include diamonds, garnets, tanzan-
ite, and zircons. Beyond this treasure, any items that would
not have remained tucked away on a victim's body (a dropped
weapon or shield) can sometimes be found near a stone
snake’s lair.

Ecology: The stone snake consumes mineral matter that it
scavenges, usually in subterranean areas with lots of crys-
talline formations, but its preferred meal is any creature that it
has petrified with its special poison. When a stone snake has
paralyzed a victim, it drags the prey off to its lair for safety
and then slowly swallows it whole, digesting the meal over
the course of several weeks, depending on the size of the vic-
tim. During this digestion period the stone snake seems to go
into a hibernation stage, so it does not move and is much eas-
ier to kill.

Stone snake egg yolk is a prized ingredient for the ink used
to inscribe the wizard spell stoneskin onto a scroll.

 
 

Spectral Wizard

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any

 

 

 

 

 

 

FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any (usually night)
DIET: Nil

INTELLIGENCE: High to Genius (13-18)
TREASURE: V

ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1-2

ARMOR CLASS: 0 or 8 (see below)
MOVEMENT: 12, Fl 15(B)

HIT DICE: 5

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: Special

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spells, paralyzing touch
SPECIAL DEFENSES: — See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: M (6’ tall)

MORALE: Champion (15-16)

XP VALUE: Low level: 4,000

High level: 5,000

Spectral wizards are undead that retain their abilities to cast
spells. They are created by a unique spell that functions on
human and elf wizards and gnome illusionists, taking hold
only on those whose bodies once channeled wizard magic.

Spectral wizards appear as they did in life, though most of
the color has been drained from them. They appear in what
they wore at the time of death, and it is as insubstantial as
their bodies. They are incorporeal and nearly invisible in
bright light. In darkness they cast an unearthly glow.

Combat: Spectral wizards exist partially on the Ethereal Plane,
so they can be affected only by spells, silver or enchanted
weapons, or by ethereal combatants. If challenged on the Ethe-
real Plane, a spectral wizard is AC 8.

A spectral wizard attacks with its paralyzing touch. A suc-
cessful hit causes one of its opponent's limbs (roll 1d4: 1 =
right arm, 2 = left arm, 3 = right leg, 4 = left leg; reroll any
repeats) to become numb and useless for 2d4 rounds. Coming
within 10 feet of a spectral wizard causes portions of oppo-
nents’ bodies to tingle as if they had “fallen asleep” and results
in a—1 penalty to attack rolls.

With effort, a spectral wizard can become solid, allowing it
to use weapons and material spell components. Solidification
takes one round in darkness or 2d4 rounds in bright light
(such as daylight or a continual light spell). In both incorporeal
and solid forms, the wizard is AC 0.

When spectral wizards are created, they are permanently
drained of 1d4 levels and will forever cast spells at this new
level. Spectral wizards who operate at level 5 and above are
considered high level when rewarding experience points.

Material components carried on the spectral wizard’s per-
son become insubstantial and resolidify when it does.

Spectral wizards are immune to sleep, charm, hold, cold, fear,
polymorph, paralyzation, and death magic. They are turned as
spectres.

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Spectral wizards can be encountered any-
where. They often make lairs in their former homes or in a
place where other wizards live. All continue to memorize
spells from their books and scrolls, and many become involved
in research into new spells or magical items. Spectral wizards
have difficulty studying because of their immaterial state.
Though spectral wizards can be of any neutral alignment,
the majority are neutral evil and only a few (5%) are neutral!
good. Their insubstantial nature seems to cause a mental
imbalance which turns them to a neutral evil alignment.

Ecology: Spectral wizards are created artificially and have no
ecological niche.

Create Spectral Wizard (Necromancy)
8th-level Wizard Spell
Range: Touch
Components: V, 5, M
Duration: Permanent

Casting Time: 1 turn
Area of Effect: 1 wizard
Saving Throw: Negates

This spell allows the caster to cause a human or elf wizard or
gnome illusionist to die and become a spectral wizard. If the
spell is cast on an unwilling recipient, the victim is allowed a
saving throw vs. death magic to negate the spell.

In the process of dying and becoming undead, the spell’s
recipient is drained of 1d4 levels. Once animated, the spectral
wizard is free-willed, but any utterance from its creator acts as
a suggestion spell upon the spectral wizard. Only a wish spell
can free a spectral wizard of its undead state. If the wizard is
restored to life, there is a 50% chance that he will be restored
with his original levels intact. It is possible that another undis-
covered process may restore the spectral wizard.
Spell Weaver

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any land
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Herbivore
INTELLIGENCE: Genius (17-18)
TREASURE: Magical items (see below)
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 2
MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 10

THACO: 11

NO. OF ATTACKS: See below

 

DAMAGE/ATTACK: As per wizard spell
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Surprise bonus when invisible
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Immune to effects of pain and

to psionics and fear-based attacks;
planar impenetrability; innate spell
powers; invisibility at will

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE; 50%

SIZE: M (5' tall)
MORALE: Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: 10,000

Spell weavers are nonhuman spellcasters of great power, orig-
inating from an alternate Prime Material Plane. Only vaguely
humanoid in appearance, they have a combination of mam-
malian, reptilian, and insectoid features.

Spell weavers are totally silent, using telepathy (10-mile
radius) to communicate among themselves. Humans find that
telepathic communication with spell weavers is extremely dif-
ficult and even dangerous, resulting in temporary insanity for
any individual who attempts ESP or telepathic rapport and
fails to save vs. spell (Wisdom bonuses apply). Insanity lasts
1d6 days, with effects as per the mage spell confusion.

Combat: Spell weavers possess a keen interest in magical
items and phenomena of all kinds. A group of them will orga-
nize to steal a unique magical device in a commando-like raid
of hellish ferocity, invisibly bypassing outer guards to appear
near the item itself. If necessary, the group will destroy or inca-
pacitate the guards, then seize the item and escape.

Spell weavers automatically detect magic and detect invisibil-
ity in a 100-foot radius. Each can plane shift once per day, shift-
ing only from its home plane to an alternate one or back again
(the latter usually at the end of a raid). A spell weaver is
immune to fear, though they will retreat if common sense dic-
tates. Their peculiar decentralized nervous systems render
them resistant to pain and to all psionic attacks.

Each spell weaver possesses a fixed assortment of spells
that it casts solely through the use of complex arm and hand
gestures, using no verbal or material components; the casting
time for such spells is the same as for humans. Some of their
spells are previously unknown to humanity, but usually they
are wizard spells of up to 6th-level (cast at the 12th level of
ability). Further, the segmented brain of a spell weaver sup-
ports magical multi-tasking, allowing it to cast multiple spells

 

 

 

 

 

simultaneously. To cast a spell, a spell weaver uses as many
arms as the spell has levels. Thus, a single creature could cast a
4th-level spell using four arms while simultaneously casting a
2nd-level spell with its other two arms. Spell weavers use this
ability whenever they face multiple attackers. A spell weaver
may also cast two or more identical spells simultaneously
(two fireballs, for example).

A spell weaver has a number of “spell points” (one point
for each spell level) equal to its hit points. It can use each spell
in its arsenal any number of times within the limits of its spell-
point total. Thus, a spell weaver with 43 hp can cast a number
of spell levels each day adding up to 43 spell points. Spells are
selected at the time of casting.

They always carry magical items (1-2 per creature), One
item is always of the conventional sort (random roll for
type, none cursed), and the additional item (if any) is a
unique device that humans call the chromatic disk. Any mag-
ical item may be employed at the same time a spell weaver
casts any spells, devoting one or two arms (as necessary) to
the effort.

A chromatic disk is a 6-inch-diameter disk of an unknown,
indestructible substance. It glows with a bright light that
slowly shifts through the visible spectrum, becoming red,
orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, and violet in a matter of
seconds. The disk is a vessel of magical power that spell
weavers can tap, thus increasing their effective spell-point
total by 10 points. Each disk releases magical energy as it is
used, allowing the spell weaver to cast more of its spells. The
disk is consumed in the process, evaporating as its energy is
exhausted. A spell weaver may employ a disk in combat,
devoting one arm to holding the disk.

All recorded human attempts at employing chromatic disks
have resulted in explosive disaster (10d4 damage explosion in
a 30-foot radius; material items must save vs. crushing blow).
It is rumored that spell weavers use arcane means of their own

 
 

Spell Weaver

 

 

to create such disks by drawing the magic out of enchanted
items (such as swords, wands, or scrolls) that they have cap-
tured. This process permanently destroys the magical proper-
ties of the objects so used.

Habitat/Society: Aloof and inscrutable, spell weavers are gen-
erally regarded as intelligent, if bizarre. Although the race
usually expresses little interest in humanity, a history of
destructive encounters has earned them mankind's fearful
respect. Although the two races rarely communicate, owing to
resultant insanity among humans, spell weavers sometimes
leave written messages for humans, but they are often cryptic
and confusing. Infrequent alliances with humans in order to
acquire magical devices have been reported, however.

Spell weavers are solitary creatures, though it is possible
to meet more than one if they are on a raid. They reproduce
through a magical fission process that results in two identi-
cal spell weavers of half the size and strength of the original.
It would appear they have no control over this process, as
they have been known to divide even during crisis situa-
tions (1% chance per meeting of this occurring; the process
takes 1d6 + 4 rounds, during which time the individual
makes no attacks).

All spell weaver activities appear to be confined to the
Prime Material Plane(s). Each spell weaver can create a region
of planar impenetrability around itself (200-foot radius), once
per day, for 10 rounds. All scrying attempts and planar travel
into, out of, or through this area, whether by spell, artifact,
psionics, or intrinsic ability, result in failure. This ability
requires no expenditure of energy on the part of the spell
weaver, although this effect will not be activated in a round
during which the spell weaver has been surprised. The activa-
tion of this planar shield takes a full round of concentration,
during which the creature cannot cast any spells.

Spell weavers have the unsettling habit of lying dormant
and invisible for months in various areas of magical interest
(magical temples, castles, portals, dungeons, etc.), and becom-
ing active only if detected. When encountered in this fashion,
they are generally murderous and implacable.

Spell weavers make their lairs in a bewildering variety of
locations, including underground, outdoors within giant
mutated trees, on magical floating platforms disguised as
clouds, etc. All spell weaver lairs contain 1d8 unusual pillars
(10-foot-tall stone or wood columns covered with magical
runes that are indecipherable to humans). Stolen magical
items are sometimes (10%) found atop a pillar. While pro-
longed study of the runes on a column can be mentally dam-
aging (successfully save vs. petrification once per round or be
confused for 1d10 rounds), incidental viewing produces only
mild headaches. Touching the runes may have unpredictable
magical effects (at the DM’s whim).

Ecology: The ecology of the spell weaver remains a mystery,
as those who have researched them have become insane.

The accompanying tables may be used to generate a spell
weaver's bank of usable spells. A 1d4 roll is made on the Spell
Weaver's Spells table for each being, then the particular spells
each spell weaver has are generated using the Spell Selection
Tables. A spell weaver can cast only these spells and no others.
Feel free to augment the lists and manipulate the results in
order to produce an interesting spell weaver.

Spell Weaver's Spells

1d4

Roll = Spells

2 offensive, 2 defensive, 1 utility (maximum level 5)
3 offensive, 3 defensive, 2 utility (maximum level 6)
4 offensive, 4 defensive, 3 utility (maximum level 6)
4 offensive, 4 defensive, 4 utility (maximum level 6)

mH Lo bh

Spell Selection Table: Offensive Spells
1d20

Roll Spell (level)
1-2 Magic missile (1)
3 Web (2)

Ray of enfeeblement (2)

5 Fireball (3)

6 Hold person (3)

7 Lightning bolt (3)

8 Slow (3)

9 Confusion (4)

10 Evard’s black tentacles (4)
ll Fear (4)

12 Ice storm (4)

13 Cloudkill (5)

14 Cone of cold (5)

15 Conjure elemental (5)

16 Chain lightning (6)

17 Death spell (6)

18 Disintegrate (6)

19 Stone to flesh (6)

20 Unique spell (DM's creation: level 1 to 6)

Spell Selection Table: Defensive Spells

1d20

Roll Spell (level)

1 Armor (1)

2 Feather fall (1)

3 Shield (1)

4-6 Invisibility (2)

7 Wizard lock (2)

8-12 Dispel magic (3)

13 Protection from normal missiles (3)

14 Fire shield (4)

15 Polymorph self (4)

16 Stoneskin (4)

17 Wall of fire (4)

18 Anti-magic shell (6)

19 Globe of invulnerability (6)

20 Unique spell (DM’s creation: lével 1 to 6)

Spell Selection Table: Utility Spells

1d20

Roll = Spells

1 Darkness, 15° radius (2)
2-3 Levitate (2)

4 Clairvoyance (3)

5 Fly (3)

6 Dimension door (4)
7 Wizard eye (4)
8-10  Passwall (5)

11-15 = Teleport (5)

16 Wall of iron (5)
17-18 Contingency (6)

19 Invisible stalker (6)
20 Unique spell (DM’‘s creation: level 1 to 6)
Spider, Brain

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Subtropical, caverns
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Pack

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Brain fluid
INTELLIGENCE: Semi (2-4)
TREASURE: Zz

ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil

NO. APPEARING: 1d6

ARMOR CLASS: 2

MOVEMENT: 9,C115

HIT DICE: 8

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 5
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4/1d8 (x4)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Poison, graft weapons
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Psionics

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (6’ diameter, including legs)
MORALE: Average (8-10)
XP VALUE: 4,000
PSIONICS SUMMARY:
Level Dis/Sci/Dev Att/Def Score PSPs
3 2/2/7 EW /1IE.MB 15 90

Telepathy—Sciences: mindlink; Devotions: contact, ego whip,
intellect fortress, mind blank.

Psychometabolism—Sciences: shadow form; Devotions: body
equilibrium, double pain, graft weapon

The brain spider lives off the brain matter of intelligent crea-
tures. Although it is not a true arachnid, its exoskeleton is sup-
ported by eight hairy legs and it can climb walls and ceilings
with ease. Its body resembles a gray, wrinkled mass of brain
tissue, though in fact this is chitinous, not soft and pulpy. It
has powerful mandibles capable of injecting venom, and it has
four eyes. Brain spiders cannot spin webs.

They speak their own, sibilant language, but in combat
with nonpsionic creatures they use telepathy to coordinate
attacks,

Combat: Brain spiders generally attack from ambush, drop-
ping onto their victims from a ceiling or other high ground, or
suddenly appearing from their psionic shadow form, impos-
ing a -2 penalty upon opponents’ surprise rolls. They prefer to
attack in groups, focusing their attacks on one or two victims
and then leaving abruptly, hoping their poisonous bites do
their work. They have been known to trail a party, waiting for
one of the dead to be abandoned so they may feed.

The bite of the brain spider attacks the victim’s central ner-
vous system, first paralyzing and then killing. Unless a suc-
cessful save vs. poison with a4 penalty is rolled, the victim is
immediately paralyzed and suffers 2d10 points of damage
each round until death occurs. During this time, the poison
runs rampant through the nerve paths and into the brain, per-
manently destroying | point of Intelligence or Dexterity each
round (50% chance of either). When the venom has finished its
work, the victim's nerves are liquified and the brain spider

 

 

 

 

 

sucks out these juices for nourishment. If the saving throw is
successful, the victim is merely paralyzed for one round, and
then the effects are shaken off.

In addition to biting, brain spiders can rear up on their hind
legs and attack with their four front legs. The sharp points and
jagged backhooks on their forelimbs inflict 1d8 points of dam-
age with each attack, and this damage can be greater if they
use weapons. Brain spiders often employ their psionic graft
weapon ability to bond magical weapons or other objects to
their forelimbs. This bond is permanent until a brain spider
mentally “rejects” a grafted item. Attacks with these weapons
are made with a +1 bonus on attack and damage rolls (in addi-
tion to magical bonuses). Bonded wands are hooked into the
spider's nervous system and may be employed as well.

Habitat/Society: Brain spiders have a strict pack dominance
hierarchy, and lower-ranked members are completely servile
to higher-ranking members. The leader is a crude and brutish
tyrant, usually referred to by pompous titles such as Master
Thug or King Venom. Pack culture consists of retelling tales of
particularly delicious kills, gruesome stalkings, and clever
prey. Brain spiders think double pain provides particularly
good sport with weak prey. They are cowards at heart, quick
to flee if one or more of the pack is slain.

Although brain spiders are crude and even stupid, they
have remarkable cunning when hunting. One of their favorite
tricks is to use their body equilibrium discipline to stand over
quicksand, a pit trap, or weak ledges, goading victims into
approaching them, and then attacking the trapped prey.

Ecology: Brain spiders prefer to hunt and kill intelligent and
psionic creatures, as these provide the richest cerebral nectar.
They dwell underground, where solitary drow and mind flay-
ers sometimes fall into their clutches.

 
Suwyze

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any, subterranean
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (15-16)
TREASURE: I
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 4
MOVEMENT: 12,C112

HIT DICE: 4+4

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 8
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d6

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spells, tendrils
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Never surprised
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: H (20° diameter)
MORALE: Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 975

The suwyze seems to be composed entirely of feathery anten-
nae, wispy tendrils, and long feelers—a huge mass of sensory
organs. Though it takes up a large volume, most of the crea-
ture is composed of its appendages, and only its central body
has much mass. The suwyze is a watching sort of beast, a
favorite among mages and others who require security with-
out a great bother. Suwyze can learn a burbling, garbled ver-
sion of Common, though few masters teach it to them. They
move in a rippling, flowing motion, and they can cling to most
surfaces well enough to climb walls, but not cling to ceilings.

Combat: The suwyze can see danger coming from a distance,
as its feelers and tendrils allow it to sense light, heat, faint
odors, winds, magical auras, strong good or evil creatures,
and even subtle pressure changes that might indicate opening
and closing doors. Suwyze sleep fitfully, and some of their
feelers are active even then. When something triggers their
sense of danger, they become instantly alert, so a suwyze can
never be surprised. The typical response is to tell the master
and hide.

The suwyze can use each of the following spell-like abilities
three times per day: clairaudience, clairvoyance, detect good,
detect evil, detect magic, invisibility, shout, and wizard eye. It uses
these to track even difficult opponents throughout an area. Its
powers of perception also grant the suwyze a +2 bonus to sav-
ing throws against all illusion-based magic.

If forced into melee, a suwyze attacks with its feeding ten-
drils, each a 10-foot-long whiplike appendage covered with
coarse, sandpapery skin. These abrasive whips cause 1d6
points of damage when each strikes. A more important ability
is inducing magical double vision in their opponents as a play
for sympathy: Unless the victim rolls a successful save vs.
spell, the attacker begins seeing the combat from the suwyze’s
point of view, in a somewhat doctored form. This disorienta-
tion imposes a —3 penalty upon all attack rolls. Hearing the
piteous cries of the suwyze and seeing the magically exagger-

 

 

 

 

ated effects of each blow are so eerie that opponents suffer a —1
penalty to damage rolls as well. If this ability fails, a suwyze
magically shouts for help, blasting opponents in the process.

A suwyze can use rings and bracers on its tendrils, and a
favored beast may be granted these items by a gracious
master.

Habitat/Society: The suwyze is a curious beast, one probably
too clever for its own good. It views its guard duties as a
diversion, something that it is good at but that it doesn’t take
entirely seriously. Suwyze consider themselves philosophers,
endlessly ruminating on the nature of perception or simply
taking it all in. They are cowards as well, quick to warn of dan-
ger and prone to false alarms rather than ignoring a potential
danger. They are spooked by odd noises, unfamiliar smells,
strangers, or other new things in their environment.

The suwyze favors certain scents, colors, and textures, and
over time its tastes harden. Older suwyze may object to being
housed anywhere except in an area specifically designed to
meet their needs. These preferences make them difficult to
transfer from one area to another; they are good watchers, but
they become entrenched in their habits.

Some suwyze are said to have distant contact with indepen-
dent colonies established by progressive, independent suwyze
who are free of any duties to masters or owners. Given how vul-
nerable these creatures can be, these “contacts” are probably
merely the fancies of the suwyze’s hyperactive senses.

Ecology: The suwyze almost always lives in a symbiotic rela-
tionship with other underground creatures. It may serve as a
watchdog for a subterranean dragon, evil races, or others—the
suwyze doesn’t care as long as it is fed well and often. Because
of its extensive sensory powers, the suwyze must eat much
more than other creatures of its size, Also, it requires more
meat than most underground creatures.
Tatalla

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Urban
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Guild
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: K,C
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil

NO. APPEARING: 1d4

ARMOR CLASS: 4

MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 2+2

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d3 (x2) or by weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Poison, backstab
SPECIAL DEFENSES: __ Thieving skills

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: S (just over 2’ tall)
MORALE: Unsteady (5-7)
XP VALUE: 270; guildmaster 650

The tatalla, often called “the eye,” is a malevolent little crea-
ture used as a spy or as a Stealthy assassin. It is skinny, almost
emaciated, and basically humanoid.

The tatalla‘s name comes from its single, very large, pro-
truding eye. Many tatalla have tusks and large ears, and they
greatly resemble miniaturized versions of ogre giants. Learned
people suspect some sort of relationship between the two
races, though nothing has been proven for certain.

Tatalla speak Common with a guttural intonation, pervert-
ing the natural beauty of the language. They also know the
languages of similar creatures such as imps and quasits, and
they can communicate with bats and rats.

Combat: All tatalla have thieving abilities as follows: PP 50%;
OL 42%; F/RT 40%; MS 50%; HS 51%; HN 20%; CW 90%;
backstab for triple damage.

When assigned to kill someone, the tatalla usually attempts
to sneak into that individual's home, where it bites him and
scurries away, only to return each following night and do so
again. A bite wakes any person who fails a Wisdom check, but
the bite mark appears to be that of a large spider. The first nip
causes nausea and the second increases that sickness, causing
weakness and a loss of Dexterity (no Dex bonus to Armor
Class and —2 penalty to all attack rolls). A third bite within as
many days kills the victim in 1d4 rounds unless the victim
rolls a successful saving throw vs. poison. Each bite beyond
the third requires another saving throw, with a cumulative —2
penalty to each roll. The tatalla visits its victim’s residence for
as many consecutive days as rossi trailing the victim if it
tries to escape by changing resting places.

Generally, tatalla try to avoid direct combat, preferring to
accomplish their tasks without being noticed. Many run when
threatened. If cornered or if assigned to kill someone, how-
ever, they can fight very ferociously—each of their claws
inflicts 1d3 points of damage. Many tatalla carry a pair of

 

 

 

 

 

small weapons, such as a pair of jambiya or razors; they can
use two such weapons simultaneously with no penalties. The
tatalla can also forgo its normal two attacks, attempting to use
its poisonous bite instead. It attacks using its regular THACO,
and the effects of the bites are as given above.

A tatalla can summon 1d100 normal bats or rats for aid,
which arrive in 1d4 rounds. While the tatalla waits for aid, it
scurries about, trying to hide from and dodge its attackers.
The rats or bats leave when the tatalla dies or releases them.

Habitat/Society: These creatures reside only in urban areas,
where their services are often desired and where they are
never far from vermin to aid them in their tasks. On rare occa-
sions they can track a victim across great spaces, traveling at
night under the cover of darkness. They have an unerring
tracking sense once they have been assigned to a victim.

Tatalla have a guild organization, much like the hierarchy
found in a thieves’ guild or a society of holy slayers. A guild
typically has 4d20 members. One tatalla is the guild master
and has approval over all contracts entered into by the guild,
as well as the ability to assign any of the guild members to a
given task. The guildmaster has 3 + 3 Hit Dice, a THACO of 17,
and it uses any magical items the guild has in its treasury.

A tatalla guild often cooperates with other illicit societies in
the same city, particularly burglars and holy slayers. They
demand payment in advance, and they never break a contract.
Payment ranges from a few pieces of silver for a surveillance
job to gold or a magical item for an assassination. If an indi-
vidual or group breaks a contract with the tatalla guild, they
quickly find themselves in a blood feud.

Ecology: Tatalla are scavengers, living off the remains of soci-
ety. They steal what they need and give nothing back to their
environment.

 
 

 

Tick, Heart

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate to tropical urban and
subterranean

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Blood

INTELLIGENCE: Non (0)

TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO, APPEARING: 1d4

ARMOR CLASS: 5

MOVEMENT: 6, leap 21

HIT DICE: 1

THACO: 20

NO. OF ATTACKS: 4or1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d2 (x4) or 1 point per round

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Egg laying

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: T (6' diameter)
MORALE: Average (8-10)
XP VALUE: 65

There are few creatures more horrid than the heart tick.
Thankfully very rare, these terrible parasites feed on the blood
of humans and demihumans.

Heart ticks are roughly circular in shape, averaging 6
inches in diameter and bringing to mind horseshoe crabs or
beetles. Their tough exoskeleton ranges in color from dark
gray to black. They have no eyesand are wholly blind, making
use of their excellent hearing to hunt prey. The heart tick has
six legs, four of them designed to grip prey and two made for
leaping.

Heart ticks are utterly unintelligent and have no language.
They are known to emit clicks and chirps, but fall silent when
prey draws near.

Combat: So delicate is the heart tick’s ability to detect sounds
that it can hear the heart beat of an approaching human, demi-
human, or humanoid when he is still 50 feet away. Indeed, the
heart tick can even tell if the creature’s heartbeat is muffled by
armor (it will not attack anyone in metal armor).

When an acceptable target comes within range, the heart
tick leaps. This imposes a —3 penalty upon the victim's sur-
prise roll. On the round that it leaps, the heart tick gains a +2
bonus to its attack roll. If the victim is surprised, this bonus
increases to +4.

The heart tick attacks four times by driving its four barbed
legs into its victim’s flesh. In addition to inflicting 1-2 points
of damage, a successful hit allows the parasite to anchor itself
to its prey. If all four attacks fail, the heart tick has missed its
mark and must spend two rounds positioning itself for
another leap before it can attack again. Once a heart tick sinks
a leg into its victim, it will not use that limb to attack again.
Legs that failed to hit on previous rounds will attack each
round until they have anchored the parasite to its host.

Once a heart tick has secured itself to a victim with all four
legs, it attempts to plunge its feeding tube into his flesh. No

 

 

 

 

 

roll is required for this attack and the victim promptly suffers
1 point of damage as the creature feeds upon his blood. On
each subsequent turn, an additional point is lost. When the
heart tick has drained a number of points equal to its own
starting hit points, it is sated. At this point it yanks out its legs,
inflicting an additional 1d2 points of damage each, and drops
to the ground.

Removing a heart tick from a victim before it has finished
feeding is a difficult task. Anyone determined to do so must
attempt a bend bars/ lift gates roll. For each leg that has buried
itself in the victim’s body, a 1% penalty is applied to this roll.
Each leg pulled out of the body inflicts 1d2 points of damage.
Even if the creature is killed, the legs that it had buried in its
victim must still be removed. Pulling these out requires a suc-
cessful Strength check and causes 1d2 points of damage each.

Attacking a heart tick while it is secured to someone
requires a great deal of care. Area attacks will inflict full dam-
age upon both the tick and its host, while other attacks will
cause half damage to both parties. Called shots might be pos-
sible to damage only the tick and not the host, although this
will depend upon the exact situation.

Habitat/Society: The origin of heart ticks is unknown, but
they are believed to have arrived from distant lands in the
holds of ships.

Ecology: Like all parasites, heart ticks cannot exist without a
host to feed upon. Unfortunately, the chosen food of these vile
creatures is mankind. Anyone who dies from the feeding of a
heart tick will be injected with its eggs. In one week, 2d4 heart
ticks will emerge from the body and begin to seek food,
 

 

Tree, Dark

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: _ Jungle, tropical
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Grove
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Special
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: Incidental
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: 1d4

ARMOR CLASS: 0
MOVEMENT: 3

HIT DICE: 10

THACO: 11

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2or1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 3d6 (x2) or 4d6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Confusion
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: H (12’-15' tall)
MORALE: Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: 4,000

Dark trees are native to jungles, and they prey upon humans
and other intelligent creatures.

They resemble cypress trees, but their bark is darker, and
little moss grows on them. They have two deep black eyes
which are almost impossible to find unless one knows pre-
cisely where to look. They superficially resemble treants, too,
but anyone who sees a-dark tree can almost feel the palpable
hatred and evil emanating from it.

Combat: Dark trees have a superior Armor Class due to their
barklike skin. They are not especially susceptible to fire, for
their bark is wet and slimy, and fire does not easily ignite it.
Hence, they suffer only half damage from fire-based attacks.
On the other hand, they do suffer a -2 penalty to their saving
throws vs. any magical cold attack.

In melee, dark trees can attack with their two arms, inflict-
ing 3d6 points of damage per successful attack. If both arms
hit, the dark tree has grabbed the victim. On the next round,
the dark tree can attempt to bite the victim with a +4 attack
bonus. A successful bite causes 4d6 points of damage as the
tree drains blood from the victim. Dark trees have the ability
to cause confusion in a target, once per round, in addition to
their normal attacks. This ability has a range of 50 feet, and the
target receives a saving throw vs. spell to avoid the effect. Dur-
ing combat this has the same effect as a confusion spell, but it is
more insidious if cast on an unsuspecting target. It causes the
victim to completely lose his sense of direction, often becom-
ing hopelessly lost in the jungle.

Dark trees are 90% likely to be taken for small cypress trees
when they are not moving, but this blending effect is only 75%
effective against druids, rangers, and other naturalists.

Habitat/Society: Dark trees live deep in the jungles, under the
forest canopy that keeps direct sunlight off them. They are
solitary creatures, delighting in tormenting an unsuspecting

 

 

 

 

 

 

group of adventurers before moving in for the kill.

Dark trees are the failed experiment of a renegade wizard.
The mage was intent on creating servants that would serve
him as well as treants. He invested a great deal of time and
much research into necromancies and other foul magic, and he
was delighted with the success of his experiments on the trees,
until they turned against him and slew him.

Ecology: Dark trees can exist by photosynthesis, but they pre-
fer the taste of blood. Furthermore, they must feed upon blood
before they can bud. Budding is a process that takes one year.
At the end of that time, the original dark tree breaks up into
1d4 + 1 identical dark trees.
 

Tree, Death’s Head

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate land
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Special
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Special
INTELLIGENCE: Semi (2-4)
TREASURE: Special
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil

 

NO. APPEARING: Special

 

 

ARMOR CLASS: 10 (trunk); 7 (branches / heads)

MOVEMENT: 0 (tree), Fl 6(E) (heads)

HIT DICE: 10 (plus 6 hp per head)

THACO: 1]

NO. OF ATTACKS: | per head

DAMAGE/ATTACK: | per seed (per head) or 1d4
per bite (per head)

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Seed spitting

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Immune to fire

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 10%

SIZE: H (15'-20' tall)
MORALE: Fearless (19-20)
XP VALUE: 5,000

A death’s head tree looks much like a weeping willow, except
its branches are thicker. Its seeds need blood to germinate, so it
grows most commonly in places where a great deal of blood
has been spilled; battlefields and places of sacrifice are two
areas where death's head trees thrive. In fact, these trees often
mark places where ancient battles have been fought or where
evil temples once stood.

A mature death's head tree bears a strange and terrible
fruit: 4d4 rotten-smelling “death’s heads.” Each of these
appears to be a severed head of any of the standard human
and demihuman races, except for the fact that each head
grows from a branch of the tree and is attached to the branch
at the neck. In time, these heads ripen and “fall” from the tree,
actually floating away on organic gases, seeking the bodies of
warm-blooded creatures in which to plant their seeds.

Combat: Like most carnivorous plants, the death’s head tree
engages in combat primarily when potential victims come
within its reach, but this plant has a unique lure: It grows
heads that are distinctly humanoid in appearance and then,
with its very limited intelligence, animates them just enough
to enable the heads to softly call “help.” While those who
investigate the source of the pleas have few problems identify-
ing the heads as monstrous, curiosity or repugnance (and a
resulting urge to destroy the tree) frequently draws them in
close enough for the tree to attack.

When physically attacked, the death's head tree uses its
“fruit” to defend itself. Each head is capable of biting once per
melee round, inflicting 1d4 points of damage and simultane-
ously inserting a seed into the wound (see below for the effects
of harboring a death’s head seed). While the death's head tree
itself is not capable of locomotion, it can move its branches.
Hence, the trunk has an Armor Class of 10, but the branches
and heads have an effective Armor Class of 7. Due to this
mobility and the flexibility of its branches, the tree is capable

 

Fs
oF
Ef

 

 

 

 

of making as many attacks against a target as it has death's
heads. Each head will die upon sustaining 6 points of eanee
and the branches may be hacked off upon sustaining 10 points
of damage (from a slashing weapon only).

Each of the 4d4 death’s heads on a mature tree contains 1d6
needle-sharp seeds that inflict minimal damage (just 1 point of
damage per seed) upon a successful hit. The heads are capable
of spitting these (one seed per head per melee round) at any
warm-blooded creature who ventures within 30 feet of the tree.

The seeds may be removed within 24 hours in much the
same way as one would remove a sliver (inflicting another
point of damage in the process). However, the points of the
seeds excrete a low-grade natural anesthetic, which means
that they don’t bother the victim after the initial sting of pene-
tration. Therefore, many victims forget about them after the
battle is over, allowing the seeds to take root. If left in place for
longer than a day, the seeds germinate and begin to grow,
causing an ever-increasing amount of damage as sprouts
spread through the victim’s body. The shoots inflict 1d4 points
of damage on day one, 2d4 damage on day two, 3d4 damage
on day three, and so on, to a maximum of 10d4 points of dam-
age per day.

Forcibly removing or cutting these new shoots out of a vic-
tim’s body, once they have rooted, inflicts damage equal to
half of what would otherwise be the growth damage for that
day, and doing so has only a 50% hance to be completely
effective. A slip of the plant may remain inside the victim’s
body and continue to grow. Any spell that will kill a plant,
however, will immediately kill the growths (which at this
stage have no immunity to magic or fire).

While most carnivorous plant life is largely anchored to a
single spot, the fruit of the death’s head tree becomes fully
mobile, once it has ripened and broken from the branch.
Buoyed by gases produced by their own rot, the fallen heads
actually float off, seeking a warm-blooded creature in which to
 

Tree, Death’s Head

 

 

plant their seeds. The smell of blood can attract a death's head
from as far away as a mile, and it can travel up to 20 miles in
search of a host. Once a potential victim is located, the head
spits until all of its 1d6 seeds are gone. Once its seeds are
exhausted, it continues to attack by biting for 2d4 rounds, at
which point it falls to the ground, dead.

Although the fruit of a death's head tree has the appear-
ance of a waxy, slack-jawed corpse, a head is not considered
undead as long as it is still attached to the tree. Only when it
has fully matured and broken from the tree does it assume the
characteristics of undead. At this point it can be turned as a
zombie. Once fallen from the tree, the head is also vulnerable
to fire, but it retains its magic resistance.

Habitat/Society: There is only one factor controlling the num-
ber of death’s head trees that can grow ina given area, and
that is how much blood has been spilled there. Theoretically,
there could be one tree for every corpse. In fact, it is not
uncommon to see an entire forest of tiny saplings springing up
a few days after a large battle. Of course, until these reach
maturity, they can be killed or uprooted as easily as any other
plant. Also, they tend to sink their roots into each other,
attempting to steal extra life’s blood and grow stronger, so
eventually only one tree is left within 50 or more feet. Thus,
the fully mature death’s head tree is a rare find.

Ecology: The average death’s head tree takes 50 + 1d10 years
to mature to the point where it can grow a crop of death’s
heads. Until the time when its branches thicken enough to
bear the weight of its ghastly fruit, it looks much like a weep-
ing willow. Only a knowledgeable observer can tell the differ-
ence.

Once it reaches maturity, a death’s head tree is capable of
living for thousands of years. A few sages have speculated
that cutting down a specimen and counting its rings can estab-
lish the number of years that have passed since a battle was
fought or a place of sacrifice was abandoned. The theory is a
sound one, but few people who are aware of the tree's nature
will volunteer to chop one down and prove it.

Once a death’s head tree matures, it produces a crop of
death's heads every other year. Within 1d6 days of budding,
the death’s heads grow from the size of walnuts to the size of
normal humanoid heads. Having reached their full size, they
take on a distinctive appearance (and foul odor) and then
begin to softly call out the word “help” in a language appro-
priate to the race of the head. Within another 3d6 days, they
ripen and begin to “fall.”

Aside from its need for blood to germinate its seeds, the
death's head tree takes its daily sustenance from the sun and
soil like any other plant. It does not require any more blood to
survive, once it has successfully germinated and rooted itself
in the ground. Because there is no limit to the type of terrain
on which blood is spilled, the death’s head tree grows virtu-
ally anywhere. One may be found growing among the stones
of a ruined temple or on an ancient battlefield that is littered
with rusted weapons and the bleached bones of the soldiers
who once fought there.

Since the fruit of a death’s head tree is always humanoid in
appearance, it is largely believed that the seeds can be germi-
nated only in humanoid blood. A few experiments attempting
to sprout a seed in animal blood have thus far been unsuccess-
ful, but sages theorize that this should be possible, since the
death’s heads are known to spit their seeds at warm-blooded
animals as well as humanoids.

Some say that the fruit of a death’s head tree resembles the
face of he or she whose blood nurtured it. Indeed, since the
death's head fruit has been heard to whisper in many lan-
guages, some sages believe that each is an undead manifesta-
tion of a particular individual. Others insist that this is no
more than mere mimicry, that there is no connection between
those who have died and the fruit of a death’s head tree.

Due to its magical nature, a mature death's head tree has a
limited amount of magic resistance. It is also immune to fire
and fire-based magical attacks. The wood of a mature death’s
head tree is prized for its natural magic resistance and immu-
nity to fire, and it is an essential part of many magical devices,
especially fire-resistant shields. It is also used as a component
in fire-protection spells.

While a death's head tree has no treasure of its own, those
it kills often carry treasure. There is a 15% chance that a corpse
lies at the foot of a death’s head tree. If so, it will have treasure
type U, plus 1d 10 of each type of coin. The body also will (90%
of the time) have a death’s head tree sapling growing out of it.
Tree, Singing

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate or tropical forest
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Blood
INTELLIGENCE: Animal (1)
TREASURE: See below
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: ]

ARMOR CLASS:

MOVEMENT: 0

HIT DICE: 12+4
THACO: 7

NO, OF ATTACKS: 1d100
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Singing
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Singing
MAGIC RESISTANCE: = 25%

 

SIZE: L (10’—20’ tall)
MORALE: Fearless (19-20)
XP VALUE: 10,000

The singing tree is an odd plant that lures creatures to rest
nearby, then drains their blood to feed itself.

The singing tree appears to be a normal deciduous tree
with uniquely shaped leaves. Each leaf sings with a lovely
voice, the hundreds of them blending into a beautiful chorus.
If hungry, the tree joins the chorus, adding its own bass line.

Combat: When the tree uses its bass line, all mammalian crea-
tures within 100 yards must roll saving throws vs. spell; those
who do not succeed feel compelled to stop for a bit and rest in
the shade of the tree. When a potential victim rests beneath the
tree, several leaves fly off the tree to attack.

At any time, the tree can send a number of leaves equal to
its hit points. However, unless ravenously hungry, the tree sets
typically only 1d6 leaves on a single victim to avoid notice.
Each leaf flutters down, appearing to fall naturally, but the
small twig that connects the leaf to the tree is also a feeding
tube, which the leaf inserts into exposed skin. For victims
charmed by the tree’s music, the pain of insertion is unnoticed.
After draining 1 hit point of blood, the leaf flutters away, then
seems to rise on a breeze, back into the tree’s branches. There,
it reattaches itself to its branch and feeds the blood to the tree.
To remain healthy, the tree must each day consume a number
of hit points of blood equal to its normal total.

Each leaf has 1 hp. Killing them individually is quite ineffi-
cient, for the tree has a number of leaves equal to 10 times its
hit points. If the tree is attacked with an area-effect spell such
as a fireball, all leaves not attached to the tree are killed, if they
are within the spell's area of effect. In addition, a number of
leaves on the tree equal to the total damage inflicted are also
killed. The tree rolls saving throws as indicated by its Hit Dice,
with normal effects for success.

Attacking the tree causes it to send all its leaves to attack.
Besides their blood drain, the fluttering leaves can cause
obscurement, lessening opponents’ attack rolls by —2. If the
tree is killed, individual leaves die in 1d10 rounds.

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: In the wild, singing trees grow in secluded
places and use their music to lure unintelligent animals. The
tree’s leaves vibrate in the wind; combined with their natural
magic, this makes a lovely sound. Each leaf has its own
“voice,” and the music is indescribably beautiful. When the
tree adds its lower tones, the song becomes very attractive and
calming.

Each singing tree has its own territory of about 100 yards in
any direction from the bole. When a seed is produced (once
every five years), a pair of leaves takes it far away so it may
claim another territory. If the seed is planted in a singing tree’s
territory, the adult sends leaves to block sunlight and attack
the smaller tree's leaves. If several singing trees grow in close
proximity, they soon overhunt the area and several die, leav-
ing only the strongest. They live for centuries if well fed.

Some wealthy individuals have tried to procure speci-
mens for their own gardens. Many owners feed their trees,
but others keep their trees hungry so they will serve as
guardians. A tree that is kept hungry turns feral eventually,
sending all its leaves to attack any warm-blooded creature
that enters its territory.

Ecology: A singing tree in the wild is similar to other preda-
tors, feeding upon prey and facing a few enemies of its own.
Animals that damage wood are its greatest enemies.

To bring a tree to civilization, one of the rare seeds must be
captured, or a tree must be carefully removed from the sur-
rounding soil, with little damage to the roots. Transportation
must also be gentle, and the tree must not be exposed to rapid
changes in temperature or to extreme temperatures. Capturing
a healthy adult tree also requires facing its music and blood-
sucking leaves. A seed or a healthy tree can bring as much as
5,000 gp from an interested buyer.
Troll, Snow

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any arctic or subarctic land
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary / pair
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)

TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil

NO. APPEARING: 1-2

ARMOR CLASS: =

MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 7

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: a

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d8+2 (x2)

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below

SPECIAL DEFENSES: _ Regeneration, resist cold

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: L (8' tall)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 1,400

Slightly smaller and broader than its fearsome cousin, the
snow troll is still a frightening sight. It closely resembles the
common troll, but the snow troll’s skin is much paler, and
large parts of its body are covered with white fur. The snow
troll’s broad, furry feet allow it to move quickly over snow
and rock, and its strong claws and arms allow it to climb as
well as any troll. .

Some snow trolls speak a few words of Common, but most
only know their own high-pitched, sing-song tongue. The
snow troll language has 20 words for “prey.”

Combat: Unlike the common troll, the snow troll attacks with
its two clawed hands only, but like the troll, the snow troll can
engage two opponents at once. It also possesses the ability to
regenerate 3 hit points per round, starting three rounds after
first being wounded, and the snow troll is extremely resistant
to cold and cold-based attacks. If a saving throw is success-
fully made, the snow troll suffers no effects from any cold-
based attack form, and it suffers just half damage if the saving
throw is failed. Conversely, the snow troll is particularly vul-
nerable to fire and suffers double damage from any fire-based
attacks, while normal damage is sustained if the saving throw
succeeds.

The snow troll is a formidable opponent, who will fight to
the death at all times. It is fearless enough to attack small vil-
lages single-handed, but its preferred method of attack is to
occupy a cave or similar dwelling along a well-traveled route,
covering the entrance with snow or rock. The snow troll
becomes intimately acquainted with the area around its home
and is able to detect its prey in a number of ways: It can pick
up minute changes in the surface tension of the snow sur-
rounding its lair, it can detect sound vibrations caused by
movement over rock or sand, or it can use (like all trolls) its
acute sense of smell to sniff out its prey. In any event, the snow
troll waits until it detects prey outside its lair, whereupon it

 

 

 

 

 

bursts forth, surprising its victims with the ferocious nature of
its attacks. A snow troll has a 6-in-10 chance of surprising prey,
and is itself surprised only on a 1 in its home territory.

Habitat/Society: The snow troll is a solitary creature, leaving
its territory only once every three years, during the mating
season. Each third year, dozens or even hundreds of snow
trolls gather in the mid-winter darkness to mate in dark
mountain valleys unknown to other creatures. The males
abandon their mates shortly thereafter, leaving them to raise
their young alone; pairs are always a mother and her off-
spring.

A snow troll’s clawed hands help it climb glaciers, snowy
mountains, and treacherous ice floes. A female snow troll
seeks solitude in high places or on icebergs when she is about
to bear young, and this territory gives her the same surprise
bonuses as her home territory. Young snow trolls grow to full
maturity within a year. They are reputed to be the most dan-
gerous because they eat twice as much as other snow trolls.

Adapted well to the harsh conditions it prefers, the snow
troll can live 120 years. It does not work with other races, as it
finds all humans and nonhumans equally tasty.

Ecology: The snow troll is a rapacious predator, able to pursue
prey over difficult terrain and, unlike its temperate cousins,
patient enough to wait hours for prey to wander into striking
range. It establishes and maintains a territory covering hun-
dreds of square miles, and it will fight and kill polar bears,
humans, and other competitors for food. White dragons are
their only natural predators. Snow trolls and ice trolls are nat-
ural rivals who fight endlessly over territory.

 

 
 

 

Tuyewera

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical land
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Band
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Any evil

NO. APPEARING: 1d3

ARMOR CLASS: 8
MOVEMENT: 6

HIT DICE: 6

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: l
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4 or by weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Steal breath, cause disease
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (6’ tall)
MORALE: Special

XP VALUE: 975

The tuyewera is a horrible type of undead monster created by
evil clerics in remote jungle villages. The cleric takes the
corpse of a man slain by death magic spells and ritually
removes the legs at the knees. The tongue is also severed. The
cleric then enchants the corpse, bringing the ancestral spirit of
a wizard or priest into it, which gives the corpse a horrid ani-
mation. .

The tuyewera moves about on its hands and leg stumps. It
is as intelligent as a man and has the following thieflike skills:
MS 50%; HS 90%; OL 50%. It serves as a thief and bodyguard
to the cleric in addition to being an assassin.

Combat: A tuyewera can use a weapon in melee, but it is
restricted to using weapons that can be held in one hand, since
the other hand is needed for balance and movement. If dis-
armed, a tuyewera will strike with its gnarled hand for 1d4
points of damage. Furthermore, each successful hit by the
hand has a 25% chance to inflict a fatal disease on its opponent
(as per the spell cause disease).

The deadliest attack of the tuyewera is its ability to drain
breath, If it encounters a sleeping, unconscious, or helpless per-
son, a tuyewera can suck the breath out of the victim’s mouth,
thereby slaying him. This requires one full round, at the end of
which the victim must roll a successful saving vs. death magic
with a —4 penalty. If he fails to save, he is instantly slain, but if
he successfully makes his saving throw, he falls into a death-
like coma for 1d4 days.

As undead, tuyeweras are immune to all mental attacks,
cold, sleep, and fear. Holy water inflicts 2d4 points of damage
per successful attack with a full vial. Tayeweras are turned as
spectres, but an evil cleric cannot take control of a tuyewera
away from the cleric who created it.

A special enchantment goes into the making of a tuyewera
that renders it immune to all weapons (turning and destruc-
tive magic such as fireball are still effective). However, dispel

 

 

 

 

 

magic removes this enchantment for 1d4 rounds, Clerics who
create tuyeweras keep this counterspell handy just in case they
meet someone else’s tuyewera.

Habitat/Society: The spells and counterspells used for creat-
ing tuyeweras are granted only by the deities of evil witch
doctors in tropical lands. Such spells are not normally avail-
able to PCs who do not visit these lands. It is recommended
that PCs be unable to create such monsters, but they should be
able to use the counterspells to make tuyeweras vulnerable to
attack.

Ecology: As created undead, tuyewera have nothing to con-
tribute to the ecology. They are little more than despicable
machines made to do their misguided masters’ bidding. They
eat nothing, and there is no known use for their parts once
they are slain.
Ulitharid (Noble Illithid)

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any subterranean

 

 

 

 

FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Community
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Brain tissue
INTELLIGENCE: Supra-genius (19-20)
TREASURE: S,T,Z (D)
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 3
MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 11+8
THACO: 9

NO. OF ATTACKS: 6

 

DAMAGE/ATTACK: _ Special
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spells, mind blast
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Spells

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 95%

SIZE: L (7%' tall)
MORALE: Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: 11,000

Ulitharids are the elite of mind flayers, favored by their god
the elder brain and free to exercise their will upon lower
illithids and all other humanoids that fall under their power.

Ulitharids tower over their lesser kin by more than a foot,
standing 7% feet tall. They are colored similarly to other
illithids, but they are darker than normal mind flayers. They
have six writhing tentacles surrounding their mouths, not four
like their common underlings, which are filled with sawlike
teeth, Like most mind flayers, ulitharids dress in robes that
cover their grotesque bodies from the ground to the neck, and
high-crowned headdresses are not uncommon.

With their incredible intellect, ulitharids can understand
the spoken languages of many races, but their mouths are ill-
suited for speech. Of course, they can communicate freely
with any creature through the use of their innate telepathy.

Combat: The ulitharid’s six faceted tentacles are much
stronger than those of normal illithids, so the monster requires
only 1d3 rounds to reach a victim’s brain, once the tentacles
have taken hold of the victim’s head. Each tentacle inflicts 1d4
points of damage upon a successful hit (at which point the ten-
tacle has seized the victim’s head unless the DM rules other-
wise), and only three tentacles are needed to establish a grip
that allows the creature to begin boring into the opponent's
head in quest of his brains.

A ulitharid’s mind blast is also much more deadly than its
common counterpart. It has the same area of effect as a normal
mind blast—a cone 60 feet long, 5 feet wide at its point of ori-
gin, and 20 feet wide at its terminus—but those who fail to
save vs. spell with a —4 penalty become feebleminded (as per the
5th-level wizard spell). Ulitharids also have the following
spell-like powers which they can employ, one at a time, once
per round, as a 10th-level wizard: astral projection, charm per-
son, charm monster, ESP, eyebite, forget, legend lore, levitate, plane
shift, suggestion, telekinesis, and true seeing. All saving throws

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

vs. these powers are rolled with -4 penalties. Ulitharids can
also heal up to 25 points of personal damage per day. This
process requires a full round to occur, during which the
ulitharid must pause and concentrate fully upon healing.

Habitat/Society: Ulitharids are the noble folk of illithid soci-
ety. About one in every 25 illithid tadpoles matures into a
ulitharid. The ulitharids become caretakers for the commu-
nity’s elder brain, ambassadors to other illithid cities, and
leaders of small illithid villages or outposts. A few sages
believe that they answer to even more powerful illithids,
although none of these beings have ever been seen by surface
dwellers.

Ecology: Ulitharids live twice as long as normal illithids, or
about 250 years. They also spend twice as much time in the
tadpole state. Ulitharids are among the most feared creatures
of the subterranean world, and few creatures wil] challenge
them.

 
 

Undead Dwarf

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Subterranean
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Clan
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Special
DIET: None
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: U
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 2d4
ARMOR CLASS: 6
MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 3+12
THACO: l7

NO. OF ATTACKS: ]

 

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 3d4
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Phase door
SPECIAL DEFENSES: +2 weapon to hit

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 25%

SIZE: M (4°-5' tall)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 1,400

Undead dwarves are created by residual essence on the part of
dwarves who are concerned, just before they die, that their
final resting places will in some way be disturbed. It is this
essence that allows the bodies of the dwarves to transform
into protectors.

Undead dwarves appear in ceremonial burial armor and
are armed with ceremonial weapons, yet their bodies look thin
and desiccated, with fragments of bone showing, and stark
white, wiry hair. They are corporeal creatures, yet they are
faintly transparent.

Undead dwarves speak any languages that they spoke in
life.

Combat: Undead dwarves do not leave the sanctified place
where they were laid to rest. If this location is ever violated or
desecrated, the undead dwarves appear from the very stones
of their cairns or crypts by means of an innate pliase door abil-
ity, which they use at will. This sudden appearance imposes a
-3 penalty upon surprise rolls for those who are the subject of
the undead dwarf’s wrath. Once they appear, the creatures
attack with short, powerful thrusts of their fists, causing 3d4
points of damage and knocking victims backward. In this way,
they drive invaders from their sacred burial area. Once all
intruders have been driven beyond the boundaries of the
sacred area, the undead dwarves dissipate into nothingness
with a tired sigh, returning immediately to their places of rest.

Undead dwarves are immune to weapons of less than +2
magical power, and they have a 25% magic resistance. They
are completely immune to any sort of mind-control spells such
as charm and sleep. They can never be permanently destroyed.
If one is reduced to 0 hit points, it dissipates with a sigh of dis-
gust and its essence returns to its place of rest, where it may
immediately reform at full hit points and reappear before a
violator 1d4 rounds later.

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Undead dwarves do nothing beyond protect-
ing their graves. When there is no threat to their final resting
places, they simply exist within their own crypts or cairns. If
approached cautiously and spoken to obsequiously in
dwarvish, they may be inclined to hold their attacks and listen
to whatever respectful apology or question is put before them.
There have even been cases where regular ritual worship ser-
vices or prayer sessions for the dead have been formed by
humble or lesser beings in honor of the deceased. When this
happens, the undead dwarves do not attack so long as no part
of the tomb area is defiled. They may even appear and listen to
the prayers and worship, although they rarely, if ever, speak or
involve themselves in the affairs.

Ecology: There is no known understanding of how undead
dwarves are formed or why they exist except to protect their
sacred tombs. It is not known if, once a place of rest has been
made safe from intruders, undead dwarves go permanently to
their rest. Whenever other dwarves discover a sacred burial
area that is guarded by undead dwarves, they typically beg
forgiveness for the intrusion and retreat to the exit. It is com-
mon for them to then seal up the entrance with good stone
and mortar so as to conceal the area completely in the hope
that the undead dwarves may go to a final rest, not to be both-
ered again. It has been documented that some dwarves have
gone so far as to collapse entire subterranean systems, perma-
nently sealing crypts guarded by undead dwarves.
Undead Lake Monster

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Deep lakes
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)
TREASURE: B
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: -3
MOVEMENT: Sw 12

HIT DICE: 13

THACO: 7

NO. OF ATTACKS: ]
DAMAGE/ATTACK;: 3d8
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Breath weapon, entrapment,

 

surprise strike

SPECIAL DEFENSES: +1 weapon to hit, fear

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: = 20%

SIZE: G (100° long)
MORALE: Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: 10,000

The undead lake monster is a rare sight. It is an ancient, gar-
gantuan, undead water serpent with grayish-green skin and a
huge mouth lined with needle-sharp teeth. [ts scaly hide is
reminiscent of the skin of a zombie, rotten-smelling and
marked with rents and gaps through which pale white bones
show. When swimming on the surface, it often appears to be a
head followed by a series of rounded humps.

Combat: This monster never leaves its lake, but it will attack
any creature that comes close to the shore. The creature lures
the curious and foolhardy into range by appearing briefly in
the center of the lake, then disappearing under water, only to
appear moments later within striking range. Despite its
undead state, the monster is extremely supple and can twist
and curve its long body around, moving quickly through the
water. It can coil its body underwater and strike like a snake
up to 50 feet from the shore or up to 60 feet above the surface.

The monster bites for 3d8 points of damage. On any bite
that inflicts 8 or more points of damage, the monster locks its
jaws around the victim and pulls him or her down into its
underwater lair. To break free, the victim must make a success-
ful Strength check. Otherwise, the victim is held underwater
until drowning results, but he or she may continue to attempt
to break free each round until that occurs.

This undead creature can exhale a highly toxic cloud of
sickly yellow vapor that is 40 feet long and 20 feet wide and
high, three times per day, producing the same effect as that of
the 5th-level wizard spell cloudkill. The breath lingers in the
air, moving slowly with the breeze and sinking into depres-
sions for four rounds before dissipating.

Should the battle turn against it, the monster can innately
invoke the effects of the 4th-level wizard spell fear (three times
per day). This affects all creatures within 100 feet who do not
make a successful saving throw vs, spell.

Because this is an undead creature, it may be turned as a

 

 

 

 

 

 

10-HD creature. It also shares the undead immunities to magic
that affect biological functions. Due to this creature’s magical
nature, a +1 or better weapon is required to hit it as well.

Habitat/Society: Such monsters are considered unique, yet
there are some who speculate that there is more than one “ser-
pent of the depths” in any world. Some claim to have sighted
two separate sets of humps breaking the surface of a lake at
once. Other sages maintain that the undead lake monster has
an unnatural brood of little serpents, and that its attacks upon
any who approach its lake are the equivalent of a mother pro-
tecting her young, but it is unclear how an undead creature
could give birth to young.

The monster’s watery lair is said to be filled with the trea-
sures of those it has pulled down to their deaths, but the lake
which houses such a creature is always hundreds of feet deep,
so it’s unlikely that any of that supposed treasure could ever
be recovered. Even if items are somehow found, any armor or
weapons in the hoard (unless magically protected) are likely
to be rusted and useless,

Ecology: Because it is undead, the lake monster has no natural
life span. If killed, it will not provide any useful products. Its
hide is tough enough to use for (leather) armor or a shield, but
it has an oppressive stench that will force a character trying to
use it to make hourly saving throws vs. poison to avoid nau-
sea (—1 penalty to attack rolls).
 

 

Whipsting

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Rocky, subterranean
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Solitary or small pack
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore, scavenger
INTELLIGENCE: Varies (1-12)
TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1d6

ARMOR CLASS: 7

MOVEMENT: 9, FL 9(D)

HIT DICE: 1+4

THACO: 19 (15 if springing)

NO. OF ATTACKS:

!

 

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-2/1 (2)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Venom
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

 

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: S-L (tentacles 5-20° long)
MORALE: Steady (11-12)

XP VALUE: 175

The whipsting is a vicious predator found on rocky ledges, in
caverns, and among ruins. The strike of a whipsting makes a
loud, whiplike crack audible up to 70 feet away. Whipstings
have wrinkled, spherical bodies 6 to 12 inches in diameter.
From opposing sides of a whipsting’s ball-like form protrude
two dexterous, tapering tentacles anywhere from 5 to 20 feet
long. Both tentacles end in sticky tips that aid the whipsting in
grasping and climbing, and each has a fixed, bony stinger pro-
truding at an angle just beside the leathery tentacle tip. Amid
the “wrinkles” (skin flaps) of the muddy-gray body are many
eyes. A whipsting has both normal and infravision, effective
to 120 feet.

On the underside of a whipsting is a sucking mouth domi-
nated by three sharklike teeth, set in a triangle. The teeth can
move independently of one another and are capable of gnaw-
ing through armor plate. When they close together, they meet
to completely seal the whipsting’s mouth.

Combat: A whipsting usually waits for prey with one tentacle
curled underneath itself to form a natural spring. If facing a
large foe, it avoids attacking or seeks to flee altogether by
using this curled tentacle to leap about like a pogo stick.
Otherwise, its initial attack consists of suddenly straightening
this tentacle to propel itself in a wild spring that ends ina lash-
ing whip of the body, driving its envenomed stinger deep into
an opponent (+4 attack bonus). The whipsting then tries to
constrict, smother, or strangle prey by remaining attached to
it, slapping with its tentacles to drive home its two stings. A
whipsting’s stinger strikes for 1 point of damage and also
injects venom into or onto its prey. The prey must successfully
save vs. poison with a —2 penalty to avoid the venom’s effects.
If the save fails, the prey shudders uncontrollably on the
round following the sting. Nausea and weakness ruin all
attacks and spellcasting attempted by the victim in that round,
and cause the automatic dropping of all wielded or carried

 

 

 

 

 

objects; tasks requiring high dexterity are impossible. The vic-
tim also suffers a one-round Armor Class penalty of 1. On sub-
sequent rounds, the victim can move normally, but remains
weak—attack and damage rolls suffer —3 penalties in that
round, then —2 penalties the following round, —1 penalties on
the next round, and return to normal thereafter. Every success-
ful sting results in another round of shuddering (barring a suc-
cessful save).

Habitat/Society: Little is known about these predators. They
are believed to be hermaphroditic and to vary widely in intelli-
gence. They lay eggs (large and rubbery, like turtle eggs, often
green-white or dun in color) in caves or dark crevices. These
eggs are edible, but have no market value. Whipstings are more
often found in groups than alone, and they peacefully coexist
with each other. They are thought to live many years.

Ecology: A whipsting eats any meat it can find, living or dead,
gorging itself tirelessly. Its elastic body can expand to contain
meals of up to 10 times its own size.

Whipstings have been occasionally domesticated as pets or
guards. Perytons and griffons are known to eat whipstings,
biting off the stings with their first attacks to avoid the venom.
Whipstings are themselves immune to the effects of their own
venom, which is an ingredient in the making of rings of weak-
ness and nausea-inducing medicines.

Stingwings

Approximately 10% of whipstings have gauzy, fragile wings
that allow them to glide down from heights or jump farther
than wingless whipstings—up to 60 feet horizontally. Such
wings regenerate in 1d3 days if damaged. The wings cannot
be targeted in combat, but a captured stingwing could have its
wings cut off (AC 10, 1 hp), and they will automatically be
destroyed by any sort of area-effect fire spell.
 

P

Windghost

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any (airborne)
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Servant group
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (15-16)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Lawful neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1d12

ARMOR CLASS: —2
MOVEMENT: Fl 18(B)

HIT DICE: 9+9

THACO: 11

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 plus special

 

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 3d4
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Windsong, swoop, swallow whole
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Warp dweomer

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 45%

SIZE: H (conical 8 diameter, tapering
to 24° long)

MORALE: Fearless (19-20)

XP VALUE: 12,000

Windghosts may be native to another plane. They are flying
cones, the large base (their head) foremost. A windghost has a
rough, mottled, flexible, smoky-gray to purple body, white
pupil-less eyes (120-foot infravision and vision into the Astral
and Ethereal Planes), and a many-fanged mouth. It has two
retractable 4- to 20-foot tentacle-arms on either side of its
mouth; these carry items or hold prey, inflicting no damage.

Windghosts speak i in hissing, rumbling, windlike voices,
and know the Common tongue. They can make their eyes and
bodies glow with a faerie fire radiance; this effect, seen by
night, has given them their name.

nig Windghosts fight by swooping out of the sky to gob-
ble up foes. Against nonflying foes, the force of their swoop
increases their bite damage by 1d4 + 1 hp. Once engaged, a
windghost can’t swoop again until it has broken off attack and
climbed aloft for one round. If a swoop attack roll on an M-
sized or smaller creature is 19 or 20, the windghost swallows
its prey whole. Swallowed prey is whirled about in corrosive
fluids for 2d6 damage and then spat out; all possessions must
save vs. acid. The prey must make Strength, Dexterity, and
Intelligence checks. If the Intelligence check fails, the prey is
blinded for 1d6 + 1 rounds and can’t attack until spat out. If all
three checks succeed and the prey has a weapon ready when
ingested, it gets one maximum-damage attack while inside.

When two or more windghosts are within 90 feet of each
other, they can emit harmonizing drones known as windsong,
which makes reading, spellcasting, and even hearing normal
speech impossible. Windsong takes effect 1-2 rounds after it is
begun and lasts 1d8 rounds before it must be broken off for at
least 1d4 + 3 rounds.

Windghosts are immune to mind-reading or affecting
magic, and resistant to psionic probes and attacks. (Apply
their magic resistance against all attempts; any saving throws
still apply.)

 

 

 

 

 

 

A windghost’s most dangerous ability is the warp dweomer,
or “magic shift.” It can move magic-dead areas to envelop
itself or enemy spellcasters, or it can throw out a field that
intercepts incoming dweomers and moves their areas of effect
before they are manifested—a wizard casting a fireball at a
windghost may find it takes effect around himself. This ability
works against only one magical attack per round, but the
windghost can choose which magic to intercept and what to
do with it. A surprise attack won’t be intercepted unless the
windghost is alert. It can let beneficial magic through, but its
magic resistance is involuntary, and must still be overcome.

When a windghost chooses to warp dweomer, roll 1d12. Ona
roll of 3 or less, it fails to affect the magic. On a roll of 4—6, it is
unable to seize control and redirect it, so it deflects it in a ran-
dom direction. To find distance, roll 4420 and consider the
total to be feet. On a roll of 7 or greater, the windghost has con-
trol and can put the magic where it desires, so long as the cho-
sen spot is within a range of 144 feet. Relocated magic has full
effects; if the source has magical protections that reflect magic,
the magic jumps back to where the caster first aimed it.

Windghosts regenerate 1 hp/turn. Their nature protects
them against attacks that involve whirling winds; against such
spells and all air elemental attacks, they suffer only half dam-
age. A wind wall spell is no barrier to a windghost.

Habitat/Society: Windghosts seem both bisexual and long-
lived. They enjoy drifting along, watching life and beauty
below. They neither have nor value treasure.

Ecology: Windghosts have no known natural enemies. They
eat creatures they slay, but do not attack for food. They also
consume carrion and whole leafy plants, “drink” by immers-
ing themselves in water, and absorb heat by basking in the
sun.
 

 

Wolf, Dread

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any land
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Pack or special
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: 34

‘ARMOR CLASS: 6
MOVEMENT: 18

HIT DICE: 4+4

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: l

 

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d10
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Disease
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Regeneration, immunity and

resistance to spells

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: S (2’+1' long)
MORALE: Fanatic ( 1l7= | 5)
XP VALUE: 650

These creatures were originally created by a renegade mage,
but word of how to create these horrid creatures seems to have
spread across the Prime Material Plane. These undead beasts
are the eyes and ears of any mage who creates them.

Combat: A dread wolf fights like any other wolf, biting and
tearing with its fangs, but if a group of dread wolves is within
its 50-mile control limit (see “Ecology”), it will fight under the
direction of the controlling mage. If a group is outside this
limit, the wolves will fight using normal pack tactics.

Dread wolves cause a nasty rotting disease that can infect a
bitten opponent who fails a save vs. poison within one hour of
the fight—he loses 1 hp per hour until death. Treatment within
the first hour by someone with the herbalist nonweapon profi-
ciency adds +2 to the saving throw. A cure disease spell stops
the disease.

During | combat, a dread wolf regenerates like a troll,
regaining 3 hp per round after the first combat round. Only
acid, fire, or total dismemberment will inflict permanent dam-
age. It is immune to charm, hold, and cold-based spells. Elec-
tricity-based spells cause only half damage.

Total dismemberment occurs when the creature's negative
hit-point total is equal to or greater than its full positive hit-
point total. However, the creature continues to fight until it
reaches —10 hp. It then goes down until it regenerates to at
least 9 hit points.

Habitat/Society: As undead creatures, dread wolves have no
society. They reach a state of rotten decay soon after they are
made. Their fur falls out and they stink so badly that they can
be smelled 120 feet downwind.
A mage can have no more than one group of wolves (see
“Ecology”) under control at a time and cannot give over con-
trol of his dread wolves to anyone else. To try either action
causes the cessation of the spells animating the wolves and

 

 

 

 

 

leads immediately to their permanent destruction.

Dread wolves have no interest in treasure, but the control-
ling mage can order them to find and bring back anything one
of them can carry away in its mouth.

Ecology: As magically animated undead, dread wolves have
no natural place in any ecosystem. To create these servants, a
mage must be evil and at least 9th level, and he must have 3d4
wolves that have been dead for no more than a day. The spell-
caster begins an incantation over the dead wolves that com-
bines modified versions of animate dead, summon shadow, and
dismissal. By doing this, the mage summons a shadow from
the Negative Energy Plane and breaks it into parts which are
infused into the wolves, creating the dread wolves.

The spellcasting takes an hour. If spell is interrupted, the
energies of shadow’s separate parts are unleashed. When this
happens, the mage suffers 3d10 points of damage (no save)
from the other-worldly energy blast.

At the end of the hour, the mage will have 3d4 servants that
can travel up to 50 miles away and enable him to see and hear
everything they see and hear. The wolves are directly under
the control of the mage’s mind within this distance.

The wolves can venture outside the 50-mile limit, but they
lose contact with the controlling mage. Unless previous com-
mands prevent this, the wolves will immediately try to get
back within the limit to regain contact. The dread wolves can
be given a command of up to three short sentences (a total of
30 words), which they will cover any distance to fulfill, This
command will always be fulfilled unless the dread wolves are
destroyed first.

For some unknown reason, the spell that makes dread
wolves will not work on dogs. A mage who attempts this on
dogs suffers 3d10 points of damage as described earlier.
 

Wolf, Stone

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any land
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Special
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Animal (1)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO, APPEARING: id4
ARMOR CLASS: 0
MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 5+4
THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: l

 

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2d4

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Initiative bonus, pounce

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Resistance and immunity to
certain spells and weapons

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: S (5'-6' long)
MORALE: Fearless (19-20)
XP VALUE: 1,400

As these creatures are animated stone, their appearances can
vary widely along a wolf theme. The only similarity between
all stone wolves is the use of white-hot fire opals for eyes.

Combat: Melee with stone wolves can be tricky. The change
from motionless statue to moving creature is almost unnotice-
able, giving them a +4 initiative bonus in the first round of
combat. On a natural 20 attack roll, the wolf has made a suc-
cessful leap and pounce, pinning its opponent and inflicting
an extra 1d6 points of crushing damage. A successful bend
bars/ lift gates roll is needed to escape (one roll per five rounds
is allowed). All Dexterity and shield bonuses are canceled for
the period of time the victim is trapped, and the stone wolf
gets a +4 attack bonus.

Missile fire inflicts only 1 point of damage per arrow, stone,
or bolt to a stone wolf; edged weapons cause only half dam-
age; blunt, smashing weapons visit full damage; and magical
weapons always get their full bonuses.

Stone wolves have one particular weakness: their eyes. If a
character uses the called-shot optional rules from The Complete
Fighter’s Handbook, he can go for a stone wolf's eyes. Should
the character succeed, he may roll a second 1d20. On a roll of 1
or 2, the character has succeeded in smashing both fire-opal
eyes, immediately destroying the wolf. Otherwise, he has
destroyed one eye, imposing a -4 attack penalty on its blind
side.

Stone wolves are immune to sleep, hiold, charm, and all cold-
or paralysis-based spells, They suffer half or no damage from
fire- or electricity-based spells, depending upon whether they
successfully save vs. spell. A stone to flesh spell makes them
vulnerable to all weapons and gives them AC 10 if they fail a
save vs. spell. A transmute rock to mud or disintegrate spell
destroys a stone wolf instantly if it fails a save vs. spell. An
earthquake spell inflicts 6d8 points of damage (half damage if a
save vs. spell is successful). A move earth spell turns one stone

 

 

 

 

 

wolf into a statue permanently if the creature fails a save vs.
spell (but since the creature is animated, it gets a sav ing
throw). A wall of stone spell disperses the creature’s mass into
the newly created wall if the stone wolf fails a save vs. spell; if
it successfully makes its saving throw, there is a 50% chance
that the creature is on the same side of the new wall as the
caster. A magic missile spell causes normal damage.

Habitat/Society: As animated creatures, stone wolves have no
true society other than their relationship with the mage who
created them. He can call the wolves to him at any time. They
will find him immediately, even though they cannot track by
smell. They can track by sight or hearing if necessary.

Since stone wolves are created beings, they have no trea-
sure of their own. However, they are often set to guard objects
that mages value, so it’s reasonable to assume that there is
something worthwhile nearby when they are encountered.

Ecology: As artificial creatures, stone wolves are not part of
the natural order. These creatures are created by a mage of the
9th level or higher, using a specially modified stone shape spell,
followed the next day by a specially modified animate dead
spell. The recipients of these two spells are up to four large
lumps of purified clay. Embedded within each clay lump must
be the skull of a wolf and two 1,000-gp fire opals that will
serve as the glowing eyes once the wolf shape is formed. Dur-
ing the one-day period between the formation of the wolf
shape and the casting of the animate dead spell variant, the
mage may cast no other spells of any kind.

After the second spell is cast, the mage will have up to four
guardians that he can set to guard any item or room he
chooses. Stone wolves never sleep. They stand as still as stat-
ues until a stranger gets close to the item or enters the room.
 

 

Wolf, Vampiric

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any land
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Pack
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night
DIET: Blood
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Any evil
NO. APPEARING: 3d6
ARMOR CLASS: 2
MOVEMENT: 24

HIT DICE: 6+4
THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

 

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 3d4

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Cause falling, grasping bite,
high initiative
Regeneration, immunity to
certain spells and weapons

SPECIAL DEFENSES:

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: S (2'-3%" long)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 2,000

These foul undead creatures are the result of corrupting cere-
monies used on normal wolf pups by evil clerics. Vampiric
wolves are uniformly black, with feral, glowing orange eyes.

Combat: When vampiric wolves hunt, they follow normal
pack tactics until their victim is unable to escape. In game
terms, a bite attack will cause a running or standing victim to
fall if the victim fails a saving throw vs. paralysis. Once the
prey falls, the wolves continue to attack, shifting to the vic-
tim’s arms so that he can no longer use a weapon. This
involves a called-shot attack in which a vampiric wolf has a 4
penalty to hit; success means the wolf has grasped an arm in
its mouth, and the victim cannot get free unless he makes a
successful Strength check (one attempt per round). A victim's
legs may be similarly grasped. Once a grasping bite is made,
damage is continually inflicted each round as the wolf gnaws
on the limb.

Once the victim is helpless, the vampiric wolves close in
and drink the spilled blood, an act that takes as long as the vic-
tim lives, plus 1d4 + 1 rounds. This causes the wolves’ eyes to
glow a deep red for the next 12 hours.

Since they share some of the nature of vampires, these
wolves are extremely agile, giving them a bonus of +2 on ini-
tiative rolls. Vampiric wolves are immune to sleep, charm, hold,
and paralysis-based spells. Only silver weapons or magical
weapons of +1 value or better can do actual damage in melee.
They also regenerate, instantly gaining the same number of hit
points they inflict as damage on an opponent.

Unlike a vampire, these wolves can move about in day-
light, though they normally choose not to do so. When attack-
ing in daylight, they suffer a -2 penalty.

Habitat/Society: Vampiric wolves regard the cleric who cre-
ated them as their leader, accepting no other except their own,

 

 

 

 

 

strongest member. Any other who tries to command them is
attacked. As pack leader, the cleric has complete control over
them. The pack can understand simple commands of up to
four words and will obey them even when left on their own
for long periods. But, as pack leader, the cleric also faces some
danger: Wolves do not accept weakness in their leader, and
should he show any sign of unfitness, the pack will turn on
him. Should the wolves kill the cleric, they will run free. They
will avoid contact with humans or demihumans unless the lat-
ter are hunting the vampiric wolves.

Vampiric wolves have no interest in treasure. However, the
cleric often uses them as guards. It is a better than even chance
that there is a concealed portal of some sort nearby if the
wolves are found near what appears to be a wolf den.

Ecology: Being undead, these creatures have no place in the
natural order. They destroy things and give back nothing.

In order to create these foul corruptions, a cleric must be
evil and at least 9th level. He can use 3d6 pups from one or
more wolf dens. The pups must be very close to being weaned,
but cannot have tasted meat or they will be useless.

The cleric first performs a ceremony using what amounts to
the opposite of an atonement spell. Then, every day he must
hand-feed the pups. The food can be no more than one day old
and it must be infused with one or two drops of blood from a
living human, or dust from a vampire and cursed using a
reversed bless spell. This must continue every day for three
months or the pups die. At the end of the three-month period,
the pups are fully grown and must then be slain by poisoning;
they then arise as vampiric wolves. If they are not slain at this
time, the wolves must each make a saving throw vs. death
magic or become greatly weakened (1 hp per Hit Die), living
on as bloodthirsty but otherwise normal wolves.

It is impossible to create vampiric dogs.
Wolf, Zombie

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any land
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Nil
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Non (0)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: 2d4
ARMOR CLASS: 6
MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 2+2
THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4+1

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: S (2-4 long)
MORALE: Special
XP VALUE: 65

Zombie wolves are not created by a wizard or a priest, but rise
when wolves starve or freeze to death near areas frequented
by undead such as graveyards and necropolises. Because a
zombie wolf looks exactly as it did in death, these creatures
often have gaping wounds and sometimes are even missing a
limb. They have dirty, matted fur and a rotten stench that is
noticeable up to 100 feet away.

A zombie wolf cannot how] like its living counterparts, but
it does occasionally throw back its head and utter a strangled
cry from rotting vocal chords. These creatures move with a
stiff-legged gait at half the speed of a living wolf.

Combat: Like all zombies, the slower speed of the zombie
wolf means that it strikes last in any combat round (it auto-
matically loses the initiative). While they can be turned by
priests and paladins, zombie wolves otherwise fight mind-
lessly until their intended target is dead or they are destroyed.

Zombie wolves have an Armor Class that is slightly better
than that of regular wolves due to the toughness of their dead,
leathery skin. They attack by biting, just as living wolves do,
inflicting 1d4 + 1 points of damage upon a successful hit.

Like other undead, zombie wolves are immune to charm,
hold, and sleep spells, as well as death magic, poison, and cold-
based spells. Holy water can also damage them, inflicting 2d4
points of damage when it directly strikes them. They are
turned as zombies, except when they are acting under the
direct control or orders of higher undead creatures such as a
vampire or lich, at which time they impose a -2 penalty upon
a priest's attempt to turn them.

Habitat/Society: Zombie wolves are usually found within a
few miles of the spot where they were killed (and rose again to
unlife). Like living wolves, they tend to form packs, but these
are much smaller than normal, with no more than eight mem-
bers. Under special circumstances, such as an assemblage

 

 

 

 

 

called together by a lich, the pack can contain 1d10 + 10 (x2)
zombie wolves. It takes 1d6 hours for a pack of this size to
accumulate, and anyone who sees the mass of monsters gath-
ering is easily subject to the effects of a fear spell unless he suc-
cessfully saves vs. paralysis.

Ecology: As undead, zombie contribute nothing to the ecology
of any world. It is generally thought that the creatures gain
this strange form of existence from incidental contact with the
Negative Energy Plane. Some sages speculate that the anguish
of starvation and freezing provides just enough impetus to
animate the simple animals when negative energy touches
them. Others figure that another undead creature must con-
sciously seek the dead wolves and give them unlife.
Wraith, Shimmering

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any

 

 

FREQUENCY: Summoned only by curse
ORGANIZATION: Special

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Nil

INTELLIGENCE: Non (0)

TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Neutral

 

NO. APPEARING: 1 the first day, 2 the second, 4 the
third, 16 the fourth, 256 the fifth;
on the sixth day and onward,

attacks are nonstop

 

ARMOR CLASS: 4
MOVEMENT: 12
HIT DICE: 4
THACO: 17
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

 

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d6

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Shadow chill

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Unaffected by cold, electricity,
priestly turning attempts, or dispel
magic

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: M (5’-6' tall)
MORALE: Special
XP VALUE:

These entities are nonliving energies created by combining the
forces of the Negative Energy Plane and the Quasi-elemental
Plane of Lightning. Shimmering wraiths resemble shadows
filled with sparkling points of light. They often go unnoticed
until they coalesce into man-sized but irregular forms, just
before attacking.

Shimmering wraiths speak no languages and are not
known to communicate in any meaningful way.

Combat: These wraiths attack with a single touch, but a maxi-
mum of three wraiths can assault a man-sized creature at one
time, and each inflicts 1d6 points of electrical damage, regard-
less of armor or clothing. Oddly, every hit point of damage a
shimmering wraith inflicts lowers its own hit points by the
exact same number, until the wraith dissipates.

Shimmering wraiths can be successfully struck by any
weapon, but using a metallic weapon to touch or strike a
wraith causes 1 point damage per successful touch to the
attacker, as electricity surges through the weapon every time it
contacts the monster.

If there is enough light (the equivalent of full daylight or a
continual light spell) for a wraith to cast a shadow, it gains a
second weapon. Anyone who is touched by the shadow of a
wraith suffers 1d4 points of cold damage, regardless of armor
or clothing. The Dungeon Master will have to determine the
direction from which the light source emanates, and the area
in which the wraith’s shadow falls.

The wraiths are unaffected by cold or electrical attacks, and
they cannot be turned like other wraiths, nor will a dispel magic
spell eliminate them. However, a banishment spell will send
them back to the Inner Planes from whence they came. When

 

 

 

 

 

confronted with protective spells and wards such as shield, pro-
tection from evil, wall of force, wall of iron, etc., or with physical
barriers, the wraiths can become ethereal and penetrate most
barriers (movement at half speed), then coalesce back into
physical form and attack once more. They are nonintelligent,
and their only tactic is to embrace their target.

Habitat/Society: Shimmering wraiths don’t appear to have
sentience, although they do recognize and pursue specific tar-
gets. They appear as the result of a curse uttered by an elemen-
tal being. Bound elementals cannot curse their masters, nor
can they send shimmering wraiths from the Inner Planes to
harass a former summoner, but if they break free of control
while on the Prime Material Plane, they may curse a person
for thwarting a plan or unsuccessfully attempting to bind
them.

One day after the curse is laid, a single wraith appears and
attacks the cursed character. The creature may be easily
destroyed, but it reappears on the next day with another of its
kind. Each day the number of shimmering wraiths is multi-
plied by itself, and the result is the number of them that will
appear on the next day and so on until the cursed character is
slain.

The only way to break the curse is to find the cursing ele-
mental (if it is still on the Prime Material Plane) and either
bind it or destroy it. If the elemental has returned to the Inner
Planes, it must be summoned and bound, at which point it
will withdraw its curse perforce. The creature must be satis-
fied or banished in order to keep it from cursing again.

Ecology: Some mages think that shimmering wraiths can be
used to power wands of lightning and similar items, but since
they dissipate upon defeat and always fight to the death, no
one can test the theory.
Xantravar (Stinging Horror)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Swamps, sea coasts
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary or hunting groups
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Blood
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil

NO. APPEARING: lor 1d4

ARMOR CLASS: 6

MOVEMENT: Fl 15(A), SW 12
HIT DICE: 343

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4 (x2)

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Poison, blood drain
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Spell immunities
MAGIC RESISTANCE: | Nil

SIZE: L (see below)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)

XP VALUE: 975

The stinging horror is a silent, deadly predator that inhabits
swamps, salt marshes, and remote seacoasts with tidal cav-
erns. A xantravar’s body is actually two wine-red to gray mot-
tled, teardrop-shaped, rubbery bulbs, 6 to 7 feet long, ending
in strong, corded muscles that can drive home the two hollow
bone stings at the base of each bulb with great force. Above
the stings, eight eyes (90-foot infravision and normal vision to
human range) ring each stalk. The bulbs are of the same size,
linked by a curious glowing energy field that varies in length
from a 2-foot norm to a maximum vertical separation of up to
12 feet and horizontal separation of up to 20 feet.

Combat: A xantravar’s two stingers look identical, but only
one injects a paralyzing venom as it strikes, A stinging horror
can inject this once per round and four times in a turn; if the
venom is exhausted, two turns are required for the monster’s
body to replace it. The poison stinger inflicts 1d4 damage, and
the victim must successfully save vs. poison or suffer 15 addi-
tional points of damage. The saving throw is made with a
penalty of —3 for man-sized or smaller victims, and with a
penalty of -1 for larger targets. A being who successfully saves
against the venom of a xantravar is forever immune to the
venom of that particular xantravar. They themselves are
immune to all known toxins.

The horror’s other stinger also strikes for 1d4 damage, but
with each blow it sucks 1d6 + 3 hp-worth of blood.

Above its eyes, a xantravar has indentations circling each
body-bulb—these are iris valves that emit ventral steering jets
of gas from the creature’s interior. The gas is air taken in and
mixed with vapors caused by the creature's digestion, and it is
highly flammable. Contact between a steering jet and an open
flame (such as a torch) causes the jet to become a gout of
flame, leaping 10 feet outward from the xantravar. This jet
inflicts 1d3 points of damage upon all beings in its path, while
the xantravar suffers 1d2 damage before it involuntarily closes
off the gas jet.

 

 

 

 

 

Above the jets, in the large head of each bulb, a xantravar
has floatation chambers of gas. The taking in of gas is done in
some mysterious manner by the glowing energy field that
joins the two bulbs of an xantravar’s body. The length of the
field can vary, but its existence is constant. It is unaffected by
dispel magic spells and will disrupt other fields of force that
contact it; it can be destroyed only by slaying the xantravar.
Spells involving heat, electrical energy, and magical energy
discharges (such as magic missile) augment this field; treat
damage from these as hit points gained by the xantravar. The
spells that help the field still inflict their normal damage upon
the bulbs of an xantravar’s body.

In any serious fight, a xantravar separates its body bulbs by
at least 10 feet for protection. A xantravar can be destroyed by
any attack—such as a flaming arrow—that punctures a floata-
tion chamber and introduces an open flame into it on the same
round or the round immediately after (the leak is sealed off by
the third round). A successful flaming attack into a ruptured
gas chamber causes the xantravar to expire in a violent 20-
foot-radius, 4d6-damage fireball.

Habitat/Society: Xantravars prey upon any living thing they
can reach with their stingers. They prefer to hunt at night or in
heavy fog, keeping to deep, flooded caverns or shallow shore-
line depths by day. They co-exist peacefully with their own
kind, but mate very seldom. Xantravars are bisexual.

Ecology: Xantravars don’t interact with other creatures except
to prey upon them (or be preyed upon when wounded or
already dead). Their formidable powers normally keep all but
the largest octopi, fish, and birds of prey at bay.

 
 

Xaver

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any land
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary or family bands
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Ferrous metals
INTELLIGENCE: Average to High (8-14)
TREASURE: See below
ALIGNMENT: Lawful neutral

NO. APPEARING: ld4

ARMOR CLASS: 2.

MOVEMENT: 9, Jp3

HIT DICE: 3

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: ]
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4+1

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Metal corrosion
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 45%

SIZE: S to M (3'-6’ tall)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 270

A xaver looks exactly like a sword, with a hard, silvery body
and six faceted green eyes that resemble gems around the hilt
of a blade. Xavers are intelligent creatures that scuttle about on
tiny, retractile wormlike legs.

Like rust monsters, xavers eat ferrous metals (and alloys
that include them such as steel and adamantine), but they are
intelligent enough not to be bought off with a few spikes when
they see an easily won suit of armor or much weaponry.

The body of a xaver is smooth and metallic, with a bulbous
base at one end, tapering to a point at the other; the length
between has flat sides and sharp edges. An 8-inch-long, tenta-
clelike leg is set between each gemlike eye (the eyes ring the
base of the body), but these legs are retracted at lightning
speed if danger approaches. Xavers can see as humans do, and
have 90-foot-range infravision. They do not hear or smell, and
they give off no body heat or sound. They absorb solar heat
and needed gases through their bodies, and lie motionless
when creatures approach. Their bodies do not corrode until
after death, and rust monsters cannot harm them.

Combat: Xavers cut opponents with the razor-sharp edges of
their bladelike bodies. Usually they do a battle dance, swing-
ing their bodies in wild circular slashes. Metal passes through
a xaver’s body as if the latter did not exist. Heat and electrical
attacks also inflict no damage, but the xaver’s body conducts
these with full effects to all beings and items in contact with it.
Poisons and venoms also have no effect on xavers, but cold-
based attacks cause an extra point per die of damage.

Any ferrous metal touching a xaver cracks and falls into
shards 1 segment later. The xaver will then try to eat the
shards. Whenever a xaver can gorge itself, it grows slightly. A
meal of several suits of armor or a dozen weapons or more
might make one grow an inch in length. They cannot turn off
their corrosive powers, but they can choose not to touch
metallic items.

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Xavers can go for many years without eating
and are known to live for centuries. They are solitary, but wan-
dering young, mating pairs, and a few that exhaust their food
supplys can be found in small family groups. They never fight
others of their own kind.

Xavers normally inhabit rocky lairs, but are sometimes
found among treasure hoards in which they have concealed
themselves. If a hoard is initially determined to contain armor,
shield, or weapons, there is a 4% chance that a xaver hasn't yet
managed to eat all the metal.

Xavers are bisexual, After mating, both partners go their
separate ways and engage in eating sprees in order to provide
sufficient nourishment for offspring. After 2d20 days, each
parent gives birth to a single young xaver. Baby xavers have 1
+2 HD, are about 3 feet long, and possess the full powers of an
adult. If enough food is available, they'll grow to full size
within two months.

Ecology: Xavers eat ferrous metals and rust. Other types of
metal don’t harm a xaver if ingested, but don’t give nourish-
ment and are ejected later. Most coins consist of a base metal—
sometimes ferrous—coated with a plating, so xavers often
excrete masses of pure plating.

Fire lizards, xorn, remorhaz, and harpies (who must snatch
xavers aloft and drop them from a height onto rocks to shatter
their bodies) like xaver flesh, and a few other creatures will eat
xavers if hungry enough,

Alchemists and wizards use powdered xaver bodies in
spell inks, unguents, and alternative spellcasting components
in spells involving resistance to heat and electrical energies,
the rusting of metals, and in invulnerability to metallic
weapons. Sold in the right place, a reasonably intact and fresh
adult xaver body can bring as much as 1,600 gold pieces.
weapons of great power —

 

  
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
   

Power that 4a Oy
strikes fear into the Mig ES tae a)
most magical of | ; ES
adversaries. eM

It is found only in the ,”
Savage Coast, where © -
nations and races
war among
del geht -e
desperately AY
trying to find it. | /

rie may tiga tp oy, Eien
el ea ene Oi a aac

a
ed Steel forges into i re

      

 

 

Rae nabryl provide
r SS ears eka coe =i
f this protection ee with =...
ke time, losing its magic.
y on i, it loses its protective
™ » mec neCo1
DAMM rues od dit
eee nice
~.‘\ Survival and power

ait
“SSS in the Savage

WER Coast
oe , a eee
ie

         

—). the control of
; Red Steel.

You Sr it or you don’t survive.

 
 

 

 

MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM® Annual
Volume One

 
  
  
   
 

They’ re ba-ack! Virtually all of the monsters
that appeared in TSR’s 1993 AD&D® product line,
plus many of those that appeared in the ‘93 issues
of DRAGON®, DUNGEON®, and POLYHEDRON®
Magazines, are brought together in this
first release in an annual series of
MONsTROUS COMPENDIUM supplements.

 
  
 
 
   

This book is crawling with more
than 100 denizens of the land, sky, sea,
and underdark, waiting to creep into the
nearest adventure. Creatures within these pages have appeared in

the FORGOTTEN REALMS” campaign setting, the AL-QapDiIM® world of
adventure, the RAVENLOFT® world of horror, the DARK SUN® game
world, and even the Outer and Inner Planes, but
they've all been reorganized, updated,
and edited so they can be used in
any campaign. An introduc-
tion explaining how to
breathe life into random
encounters is included too.

Every illustration is
brand new and presented in full color, so
these monsters are more lifelike than ever before!
This is a must-have item for all serious
Dungeon Masters.

U.S., CANADA, ASIA,
PACIFIC, & LATIN AMERICA

EUROPEAN HEADQUARTERS
Wizards of the Coast, Belgium

 

 

Wizards of the Coast, Inc. P.B. 34
P.O. Box 707 2300 Turnhout |
Renton, WA 98057-0707 Belgium ISBN 1~56076-838-x
+1-206-624-0933 +32-14-44-30-44 51995
Visit our website at www.tsr.com
Aovancep Dunceons & Dracons, AD&D, and the TSA logo
are registered trademarks owned by TSR, Inc.

TSA, Inc. is a subsidiary of Wizards of the Coast, Inc.
$19.95 US $27.95 CAN

 

 
