 

 

 

 

 

 

 
2107

    

Dene Le eLe

‘2™ Edition

 

 

 

TSR, Inc. ™ TSR Ltd.
POB 756 120 Church End, Cherry Hinton
Lake Geneva, TSR, Inc Cambridge CBI 3LB
WI 53147 USA ,

PRODUCTS OF YOUR IMAGINATION™ United Kingdom
Designers: Grant Boucher, William W. Connors,
Steve Gilbert, Bruce Nesmith, Chris Mortika, and
Skip Williams

Editor: Mike Breault

Typesetting: Angelika Lokotz

Artistic Coordinator: Peggy Cooper

Cover Art: Jeff Easley

Interior Art: Thomas Baxa and Mark Nelson

 

Distributed te the book trade by Random House, Inc., and in Canada by Random House of Canada, Ltd. Distributed to the toy and
hobby trade by regional distributors. Distributed in the United Kingdom by TSR Ltd.

This work is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America. Any reproduction or other unauthorized use of the
material or artwork presented herein is prohibited without the express written consent of TSR, Inc.

©1990 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved, Printed in the U.S.A.

ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AD&D, GREYHAWK, PRODUCTS OF YOUR IMAGINATION, and the TSR logo are
trademarks owned by TSR, Inc,

0-89038-836-6
2105XXX1501
How To Use This Book

 

MORALE is a general rating of how likely the monster is to perse-
vere in the face of adversity or armed opposition. This guideline
can be adjusted for individual circumstances. Morale ratings cor-
respond to the following 2-20 range:

2-4 Unreliable

5-7 Unsteady
8-10 Average
11-12 Steady
13-14 Elite
15-16 Champion
17-18 Fanatic
19-20 Fearless

XP VALUE is the number of experience points awarded for defeat-
ing (not neccessarily killing) the monster. This value is a guideline
that can be modified by the DM for the degree of challenge,
encounter situation, and for overall campaign balance.

 

 

Combat is the part of the description that discusses special com-
bat abilities, arms and armor, and tactics.

Habitat/Society outlines the monster's general behavior, nature,
social structure, and goals.

Ecology describes how the monster fits into the campaign world,
gives any useful products or byproducts, and presents other mis-
cellaneous information.

Close variations of a monster (e.g. merrow, ogre) are given in a
special section after the main monster entry. These can be found
by consulting the index to find the major listing.

 

ALPHABETICAL INDEX TO MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM 5

This index includes only monsters in this appendix, which covers creatures of the WORLD OF GREYHAWK® Campaign Setting. “Name” refers to the
creature in question, “Section” refers to the entry under which the creature is found, “Comp.” notes that these creatures are found in this appendix to the

Monstrous Compendium.

Monsters with their own entries (i.e. whose names appear at the top of a page) or whose type is obvious (“Sea Sprite” is listed under “Sprite") are not

listed here.
Secondary or regional names are given in roman type.

Name Section Comp.
Atomie Sprite GH
Buckawn Brownie GH
Cactus, vampire Plant, Carn. GH
Carmprat Rat GH
Crow Raven GH
Death worm Necrophidius GH
Drowned ones Zombie, Sea GH
Fremlin Gremlin GH
Galtritt Gremlin GH
Grigg Sprite GH
Kampfult Plant, Carn. GH

Name Section Comp.
Norker Hobgoblin GH
Pestie Mite GH
Polyp, giant Plant, Carn. GH
Quickling Brownie GH
Snyad Mite GH
Soul beckoner Wraith GH
Spriggan Giantkin GH
Swordwraith Wraith GH
Voadkyn Giantkin GH
Wood giant Giantkin GH
 

    

  
 

GRE

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

eSNG oS ay
Drone Larva Cow
f Any/Subterranean

ORGANIZATION: Hive Hive Hive
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any Any
DIET: Omnivore Omnivore Omanivore
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12) Non- (0) Low (5-7)
TREASURE: F Nil Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Neutral Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 2-20 6-60 2
ARMOR CLASS: 3 (2 6 7
MOVEMENT: i. 1, Swé6 3
HIT DICE: 6 2-5 10
THACO: 15 2 HD; 19 11

3-4 HD: 17

S HD: 15
NO. OF ATTACKS: 2 1 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4 or by weapon type 2-7 3-18
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil Nil Nil
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below See below See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil Nil Nil
SIZE: M (6' long) S (1)/2' - 3’ long) H (15' long)
MORALE; Elite (13-14) 2-3 HD: Steady (11-12) Elite (13-14)

4-5 HD: Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 650 2 HD: 65 2,000

3 HD: 120

4 HD: 175

5 HD: 270

Aspis are a race of insectoid creatures that dwell in underground
nests not far beneath the surface. The majority of encounters with
these unique beings are with the adult male drones; contact with
or sightings of the larvae and cows are all but unheard of.

Aspis drones look much like giant weevils. They have hard,
chitinous bodies that are gray or off-white in color and provide
excellent protection from harm. Their heads have two multiface-
ted eyes, a pair of short, blunt antennae, and a long proboscis.
Drones have six legs, each of which terminates in a cluster of fine
manipulatory claws.

Aspis do not speak in the way that humanoid races do, al-
though roughly 5% of them have been able to master a rough
form of the common tongue. Among themselves, they have no
spoken or written language; they communicate via a unique lan-
guage of scents. The human olfactory system is wholly unable to
detect the subtle changes of odor used by aspis in their conversa-
tions.

Combat: Almost all combat situations are dealt with by the
drones, who are charged with protecting the nest and defending
the larvae. If fighting to defend their cow, aspis warriors never
check morale and fight to the death against any odds.

When an aspis drone does battle, it rises up on its rear two legs,
leaving the other four limbs free to wield two weapons and hold
two shields. When an aspis does this, its Armor Class is improved
to AC 2.

The most common weapons employed by aspis in combat are
short swords and hand axes. Although the structure of their
bodies prevents them from using bows, they have been know to
employ an unusual form of light crossbow in missile combat and
are sometimes found with javelins and other throwing weapons.

The aspis is a very hardy creature, immune to attacks that use
cold or electricity to inflict damage. In addition, fire-based at-
tacks cause only half damage to an aspis.

When called upon to defend their nests, aspis drones place nu-
merous traps in any area they are forced to withdraw from. Even

if they are caught off guard, the regions of the hive that surround
the cow's chamber and the larvae rooms are always trapped as a
precaution against trespassers. As a rule, aspis traps involve
rockfalls, pits, and other crude devices. Delicate traps, like poi-
soned needles, are not encountered in aspis lairs.

Habitat/Society: Aspis drones have no sense of individuality,
lacking even unique names or personalities. They are nothing
more than cogs in the machine that is the hive itself. Despite their
high intelligence, they take no actions on their own unless in-
structions from the cow are impossible to obtain.

An aspis nest is a collection of underground chambers con-
nected by low tunnels bored out of soft rock or earth. A lair or
nest always contains one to three egg chambers and as many as
six grub hatcheries, which are inhabited by 1d10 larvae each. In
order to feed the hive, there are also two to four granaries.

At the heart of each aspis lair is a huge central chamber in
which the cow lives. The walls and floor of this room are covered
with a thick, white liquid that is highly acidic and eats through
metal or wood ina single round. If it comes into contact with liv-
ing flesh, it inflicts 1d8 points of damage each round until washed
off. As might be expected, all types of aspis are immune to this
fluid.

The aspis knowledge of scents, musks, and perfumes is second
to none. They are able to formulate and mix concoctions that
simulate almost any odor; they use these compounds for many
purposes. For example, a town that has taken action against a
nearby aspis hive may find that its walls have been splashed with
liberal doses of a sticky, yellow liquid that smells somewhat like
chlorine. Imagine the surprise of the watch when they find that
this substance not only attracts giant rats and similar rodents, but
it also drives them into a wild fury. Such examples of aspis venge-
ance are not common, but they are numerous enough to be taken
seriously by those who would molest the aspis.
Aspis

 

Ecology: Because of the ferocity with which aspis drones defend
their nest and its cow, this race has few natural enemies. They
generally prefer to keep to themselves as much as possible. Most
encounters with the aspis occur when hard times force a colony to
begin raiding nearby human settlements for food and other sup-
plies.

The acid that is secreted by the cow is highly prized by alche-
mists. In addition to its obvious uses as a corrosive agent, it is im-
portant in the preparation of magical inks and potions that relate
to acids and corrosion.

Aspis are true omnivores as they eat almost anything. Their di-
gestive systems are very efficient and they can derive nourish-
ment from virtually any organic matter.

Aspis are able to domesticate other forms of giant insects via
chemical cues and scents. The most common creatures they take as
guardians are giant ants. In the average aspis lair, there are 1d10
such creatures, while on occasion (10%) there are ten times that
many ants. It is not know for sure if the aspis are able to acquire
control over other semi-intelligent insectoid races (like the cave
fisher or giant hornet), but current wisdom speaks against this.

Larvae

All aspis begin their lives as larvae. In this state, they resemble gi-
ant maggots or grubs, being white or pale pink in color, Their soft

skin is easily cut through by swords and similar edged weapons.
Aspis larvae are blind and deaf, but they sense potential food by
vibrations in the ground and scents in the air. Aspis larvae can at-
tack only with their jaws.

Aspis larvae have incredible appetites and are always eating.
Asa rule, they are kept only in the grub hatcheries of the nest,
which resemble nothing more than vast sewage pits. Food scraps
and other waste products are dumped into these chambers and
form a sort of soup in which the larvae swim and feed. The stench
of a grub chamber is so vile that non-aspis who enter it must roll
successful saving throws vs. poison or become violently ill until
removed from the odor.

Cows

Once in a great while, an aspis larva is selected by the drones of a
nest and separated from its siblings. Fed a special diet and nur-
tured carefully, this larva does not mature into an adult drone,
but instead becomes a cow.

Aspis cows look like huge larvae, reaching lengths of 15 feet
when fully mature. They exude a dangerous corrosive that coats
their bodies and adheres to the walls and floor of their chambers.
Although they are slow and not at all agile, their great size makes
their bite very dangerous.
Beastman

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical and subtropical /Forests
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Tribal
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: K,Q
ALIGNMENT: Neutral (good)
NO. APPEARING: 2-12

ARMOR CLASS: 8
MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 2

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 as
DAMAGE/ATTACK: By weapon (1-8 usually)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Camouflage
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 80%

SIZE: M (5’ tall)
MORALE: Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 270

Beastmen resemble short, slender humans, except for the fine
layer of dark green or olive colored fur that covers their bodies.
Underneath this is an inner coat of coarse black fur. As a beast-
man moves about, his body instinctively causes portions of the
black fur to become erect, like the hair on a cat's back when it is
frightened, By so doing, the beastman creates a pattern of stripes
or spots that enables him to blend in with the hues and shadows
of the forest around him. Because of this unique ability, beastmen
seldom wear clothing or ornamentation of any sort.

The beastman language is very intricate, involving spoken ele-
ments, hand and body gestures, and changes in the patterns on
the speaker's fur. While other races can learn the spoken and ges-
tural portions of the language, they are unable to reproduce the
color changes. Thus outsiders can speak in only the simplest
terms.

Combat: The beastman’s unusual ability to camouflage himself
in the forest makes him a dangerous hunter or adversary. When
he chooses to remain undetected, a beastman can hide in shadows
with a 90% chance of success. This ability works only in places
where the beastman’s dark green and black coloration blends
with the foliage. When he attacks an opponent who is not aware
of his presence, the opponent suffers a -6 penalty to his surprise
roll.

Although beastmen generally seek to avoid combat (or even
contact) with outsiders, they certainly defend themselves and
their tribes. When they engage in combat, their ability to camou-
flage themselves and their natural magic resistance make them
dangerous opponents. In combat, beastmen employ a variety of
spears, stone axes or knives, bolas, and blowguns. They create a
special toxin for use in their blow gun darts—a weak form of class
F poison (those who fail their saving throws vs. poison die in 2d4
rounds). Although just as lethal as other class F poisons, all sav-
ing throws made to resist its effects gain a +4 bonus.

Sometimes beastmen take opponents prisoner rather than kill
them. In these cases, a large, weighted net woven from vines and
creepers is dropped from above. Prisoners taken with such a net
are often stripped of al! possessions and then released far from the
tribe. If, however, they are judged to be a threat even after this is
done, they are put to a painless death.

 

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Each beastman tribe consists of between 40
and 60 individuals, though most encounters occur with hunting
parties of 1d6 +4 individuals. Each tribe is lead by a chief who is
not elected or appointed, but simply adopts the leadership roll as
needed. A tribe's chief varies from one day to the next, as the situ-
ation warrants. For example, if the tribe is at war, the chief is the
best warrior. In cases where one or more individuals are suited to
the task, a competition of some sort decides the leader. It is not
considered an honor to be the chief of the tribe, it is just a duty
that many are called upon to carry out from time to time. Like-
wise, there is no shame in never being a chief, or in losing a com-
petition for the leadership spot.

Beastman culture does not discriminate against either sex. The
only exception to this rule are pregnant women who, because of
their importance to the future of the tribe, are treated with rever-
ence and excused from all heavy activity. Young are raised by the
community as a whole. Ten percent of any tribe are young (10 %-
80% mature).

Beastmen live in houses woven from the living branches of the
forest's treetops. Each such shelter provides a home for 1d4 + 2
adults of mixed gender who have a form of group marriage. In ad-
dition, there may be one or two children in the house.

Beastmen do not believe in magic, ghosts, spirits, or the super-
natural. If they cannot see, hear, or touch something, then it does
not exist. There are many who say that this is because of the
beastmen’s innate magic resistance. On the other hand, there are
those who feel that the reverse is true; that this disbelief grants the
beastmen their immunity to spells.

Ecology: Beastmen are skillful hunters, well adapted to survival
in their forests. They are hunted by only the most cunning and
powerful creatures. Although they are omnivores and gather
fruits and nuts to eat, they practice no form of agriculture.

Beastmen have little that other cultures consider worth trading
for. As their culture is self-sustaining, they have no need of or de-
sire for outside trade.
beetle

 

 

 

Death Watch Slicer
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: ‘Temperate/Forests Temperate/Forests
FREQUENCY: Very rare Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any
DIET: Carnivore Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Animal (1) Non- (0)
TREASURE; Nil Special
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Neutral
NO, APPEARING: 1 1-3
ARMOR CLASS: 3 3
MOVEMENT: 12 6
HIT DICE: 9 6
THACO: 11 15.
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 3-12 2-16
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Death vibration Dismemberment
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Camouflage Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil Nil
SIZE: M (5’ long) S (3' long)
MORALE: Elite (13-14) Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 2,000 420

Death Watch Beetle

Death watch beetles are jet black in color, except for a single
patch of white (on the back of their carapaces) that resembles a
human skull.

Combat: The horrible death watch beetle is more feared than
any other giant beetle for two reasons. The first, and lesser of its
powers, is its cunning ability to disguise itself. When a death
watch beetle finds a place to hunt, it gathers items from the area
(mainly earth, fallen branches, and the like). As it acquires these
things, it uses a natural form of cement created with its saliva and
soil to affix them to its back. When it finishes this process, it is
well camouflaged and can lie in wait for hours until prey passes
near. When the death watch beetle makes its attack, its opponents
suffer a —2 penalty to their surprise rolls.

Far more deadly than the death watch beetle’s ability to sur-
prise its foes, however, is its “death rattle” (a deadly sonic vibra-
tion). When the creature is in combat, it vibrates its carapace very
rapidly, setting up an unusual clicking sound that resembles a
gong. Victims are unlikely (only a 10% chance) to locate the bee-
tle by this sound alone. This noise is very destructive at close
range. One round after the beetle begins to make its rattle, any-
one within 30 feet of it must roll a successful saving throw vs.
death magic or be instantly slain. Those who succeed suffer 5d4
points of damage, as well as muscle pains and tingling sensations
in their limbs for several hours after the battle.

The creation of the death rattle is very tiring to the creature, re-
quiring it to rest for 1d4+1 hours before it can produce the horri-
ble noise again.

Habitat/Society: Death watch beetles are solitary creatures that
live in the temperate woodlands of the world, They do not partic-
ularly enjoy wetlands, but they can be found there on occasion.

 

 

 

 

 

 

The death watch beetle lives a nomadic life. It stops in one loca-
tion only long enough to hunt and then moves on. In fact, it aban-
dons a selected hunting location after 4d4 hours if there is no sign
of prey in the area.

Ecology: While other beetles fulfil many roles in the ecological
system, the death watch beetle is first and foremost a powerful
hunter. It is high on the food chain, as few animals or monsters
are capable of engaging it in combat with any hope of victory.

The wings of the death watch beetle are highly valuable to
skilled armorers, who can fashion them into very effective
shields. If an expert armorer is provided with both of a death
watch beetle’s wings, he can manufacture the equivalent of a
body shield +1 (although it is not actually enchanted).

Slicer Beetle

Slicer beetles are distant relatives of death watch beetles. Over
the course of evolution, they have lost all traces of their wings
and now look much like six-legged centipedes. Their bodies have
developed a hardened exoskeleton that is more than adequate
protection in combat. The slicer beetle is quite similar in many re-
spects to the stag beetle (see Volume 1 of the Monstrous Compen-
dium). It is generally black or very dark grey in color.

The mandibles of the slicer beetle are highly dangerous because
of their powerful muscles and keen edges. When in combat, any
natural 19 or 20 on the attack roll indicates that the slicer beetle
has nipped off an adversary’s limb.

If the slicer beetle is engaged in any combat that seems to be go-
ing against it, the creature grabs up any limbs it managed to sever
and hurries away, hoping to evade its attackers.
Bonesnapper

 

  

ere.

 

 

Ves 7 ADVENTURES® =)

    

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical or subtropical /
Forests and swamps

FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Carnivorous

INTELLIGENCE: Non- (0)

NO. APPEARING: 1-3

ARMOR CLASS: 4

MOVEMENT: 6

HIT DICE: 4

THACO: 1

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-8/1-4

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: M (5' tall)

MORALE: Special

XP VALUE: 120

The dreaded bonesnapper is a fearsome beast descended from
the giant carnivorous lizards that roamed the world many thou-
sands of years ago. Known for its savage aggression, territorial
protectiveness, and incredible stupidity, the bonesnapper is a
dangerous beast.

Adult bonesnappers stand an average of five feet tall. They
may weigh as much as 500 pounds. Their tough hide is not scaled,
but it is very thick and leathery, providing them with excellent
protection from all manner of physical attacks. As a rule,
bonesnappers are dark green or olive in color, enabling them to
blend in with their forest environment.

Combat: As has been noted, the bonesnapper is not a clever op-
ponent. In combat it rushes straight at the nearest foe, often let-
ting out a great roar in the charge. If it is attacked from another
direction, the bonesnapper whirls about and pursues its new ad-
versary.

The bonesnapper's primary attack mode is a bite with its pow-
erful jaws and jagged teeth. Although the teeth are not unusually
sharp, the strength of the jaw muscles is enough to inflict 1d8
points of damage with each bite (and the tail can be swept around
to hit the same opponent for 1d4 points of damage).

Bonesnappers always fight to the death, as they are not smart
enough to know when they should run away. Because they are so
amazingly stupid, bonesnappers are easily distracted and can of-
ten be tricked or trapped with little or no risk to creatures stalking
them.

Habitat/Society: Young bonesnappers, both male and female,
are solitary creatures. They travel the wilds, living a nomadic ex-
istence and hunting when they can. As they grow older, however,
they eventually stop wandering and seek out a mate,

Once two bonesnappers have mated, they take up residence in
a large cave or similar lair and begin a new life together.
Bonesnappers that have ceased their travels become very territo-
rial, chasing away or killing any large carnivores that live near
their lair.

 

 

 

 

 

In the spring of each year, the female makes a nest. She begits
by digging a pit one foot in diameter and six inches deep in the
ground. Once this is completed, she lines it with straw or other
grasses and then deposits an egg into it. The egg hatches within a
month and a young bonesnapper emerges. The baby spends the
first month of its life in the lair with its mother while the male
hunts for the family. In its second month, however, the young
bonesnapper joins its parents in a family quest for prey. This pat-
tern continues for about one year, when the half-grown
bonesnapper leaves its parents. By its third birthday the baby
bonesnapper will have reached full size.

The lair of a bonesnapper couple is always underground. Be-
cause of the creature's habit of dragging the bodies of its victims
back to its lair before consuming them, the cave is always covered
in bones. The creature's name is drawn from its habit of breaking
victims’ bones to get at the marrow. Although a bonesnapper pe-
riodically drags items like armor or backpacks out of its cave and
leaves them scattered about the entrance, it never takes steps to
clear out the bones.

Ecology: Bonesnappers are dangerous hunters, despite their
low intelligence. As such, they tend to be the dominant carni-
vores in their territories. Wandering bonesnappers are given a
wide berth by any creature familiar with them.

Because they are not far removed from their dinosaur ances-
tors, a spell that calls for the eye of a dinosaur can often be cast
with the eye of a bonesnapper. Since the bonesnapper is easier to
find and kill than most large, carnivorous dinosaurs, this is fairly
common.

Lizard men find the flesh of bonesnappers quite tasty and often
hunt them. Most other races, however, find bonesnapper hide far
too tough to be enjoyable. It is worth noting that in many lizard
man cultures, a hunter must seek out and kill a bonesnapper sin-
gle handedly in order to enter adulthood. Although the
bonesnapper is far more powerful than the average lizard man
hunter, its limited intelligence makes the fight fairly even.
Booka

 

 
   
    

z

 

 

| EEA Recho

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate to subarctic/
Inhabited regions

FREQUENCY: Uncommon

ORGANIZATION: Family

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Omnivore

INTELLIGENCE: ‘Very (11-12)

TREASURE: J

ALIGNMENT: Neutral (chaotic good)

NO. APPEARING: 1-4

ARMOR CLASS: 7

MOVEMENT: 12, Fl 18 (A)

HIT DICE: 1/3

THACO: 20

NO. OF ATTACKS; Nil

DAMAGE/ATTACK: Nil
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Invisibility
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 10%

SIZE: T (1' tall)
MORALE: Average (8-10)
XP VALUE: 35

Bookas are delightful relatives of pixies, sprites, and fairies. Like
most of the faerie folk, their time is taken up with a existence not
unlike that of the brownie, though they tend to favor attics and
eaves as living quarters.

Bookas average between 10 and 14 inches tall, with rare exam-
ples of the race reaching heights of 15 or even 16 inches. They
have slender humanoid bodies with more or less human features.
They are noted for having long, pointy noses and broad ears,
which make them somewhat homely by most human standards.
Their wings are slight and delicate, brightly colored like those of a
butterfly.

Bookas have their own tongue, which is similar to that of the
other faerie races. Roughly half of them are able to speak elvish,
while one in four can converse in the common tongue of men. It is
not uncommon to find at least one booka in a given area who is
also familiar with the thieves’ cant.

Combat: Bookas are, by and large, one of the most peaceful
races known to man. They do everything possible to avoid enter-
ing into combat, for they are all but helpless in a fight.

While it is true that a booka can deliver a painful bite, there is
no significant damage done by it. At worst, the booka’s victim
suffers a nasty welt with a minor loss of blood. In general, a
booka bite is about as dangerous as a paper cut.

Bookas are able to become invisible at will. This power is so ba-
sic to them that they can do it at any time, even when engaged in
another action. They use this ability to evade enemies or attack-
ers.

If a booka has been angered by the actions of another creature,
it may take steps to injure or even kill the offender. In such cases,
very delicate and clever traps are set up.

Habitat/Society: Bookas make their homes in every region of
the globe that is home to men. As a rule, they like rustic settings,
especially farming communities, in warm climates. A family of

 

 

 

 

 

bookas selects a farming family that reflects their basically good
natures and takes up residence in the home. In warm regions,
they may be found in any portion of the house, while colder
climes always find the bookas dwelling near the fireplace, stove,
or other heat sources.

On bright, sunny days they spend their time seeking out wild
flowers and enjoying the benefits of country living. On mornings
when everyone in the house is quiet and the weather is nice, they
often sweep and dust the home in which they dwell, as payment
for their shelter. If the bookas are disturbed in their work, or if
their nest is discovered, they quickly leave the house in search of a
quieter place to live.

If a booka is captured or harmed in any way, its companions
take steps to revenge this insult. This usually involves tricks and
traps being placed around the offender's home, the severity of
which is determined by the injury inflicted on their fellow. If the
offence is minor, the bookas can be placated with a valuable of-
fering of gold, jewelry, or magic, placed in a spot frequented by
the bookas. If the injury was severe or even fatal to the booka in
question, no bribes are accepted and the traps are lethal and quite
ingenious. It is for this reason that many assassins use the term
"booka bait” to describe someone who has been set up for execu-
tion with an unusually insidious trap.

Ecology: Because of their inability to engage in direct combat,
bookas might be considered easy prey for larger creatures. Their
natural ability to turn invisible makes them safe from most at-
tacks, however. In addition, intelligent creatures know that the
wrath of a booka family makes hunting them a very hazardous
practice,

Although it is not a commonly used component, a lock of
booka hair, freely given by the booka, has been known to be em-
ployed in the creation of magical inks for scrolls that deal with in-
visibility or the detection thereof.
Brownie, Buckawn

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate/ Forests
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Clan
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average to very (8-12)
TREASURE: XM
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 5-20

ARMOR CLASS: 3
MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 11
THACO: 20

NO. OF ATTACKS: 5
DAMAGE/ATTACK: By weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 10%

SIZE: T (2’ tall)
MORALE: Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 420

Buckawns are similar to the more common brownie, but they are
trickier and less friendly. Unlike their better-known kin, they dis-
trust all other races and shun all contact with them. If they are
pressed or disturbed, buckawns have no qualms about removing
the offending party once and for all.

Buckawns look much like normal brownies, but they generally
have darker skin and lighter hair. They tend to dress in russets
and greens, enabling them to blend in with the wild lands they in-
habit.

Brownies and buckawns speak the same tongue, although they
find each other's accents to be quite horrid. Most buckawns can
also speak one or more of the languages of sylvan creatures, such
as pixies, sprites, nymphs, or satyrs.

Combat: Although small in stature, a buckawn makes a very
dangerous adversary. The reasons for this center on the creature's
great dexterity and natural magical abilities.

Buckawns are very nimble creatures whose great agility makes
them difficult targets in combat. While this accounts for their low
Armor Class, it also enables them to hide in shadows or move so
silently that they stand an 80% chance of success at either en-
deavor.

Buckawns have keen senses. Their hearing is far more sensitive
than that of normal humans, and they know every sound of the
forest around them, so unusual sounds are quickly detected. In
fact, their hearing is so keen that anyone attempting to evade de-
tection by moving silently near a buckawn does so with a — 50%
penalty, Their sense of smell, likewise, is highly refined—they can
detect strange scents as quickly as a bloodhound.

While these other senses are fine indeed, buckawn vision is
truly wondrous. Buckawn sight extends into the infrared band of
the spectrum, giving them excellent vision in dark places. Further,
they can detect invisible creatures at a glance without the slightest
effort on their part. All these things combine to make it impos-
sible to surprise a buckawn in the wilds.

Buckawns are able to employ a wide variety of magical powers
in their own defense. Once each round they are able to invoke
any one of the following powers: audible glamer, change self,
dancing lights, or turn invisible. In addition, they are able to em-

 

 

 

 

 

ploy entangle, pass without trace, summon insects, or trip spells
once each per day. In all cases, these powers are initiated with but
a thought, requiring no recognizable casting of any sort. They
take effect instantly and can be employed while the buckawn en-
gages in another action. All buckawn spells function as if cast by
a 6th-level caster.

Buckawns favor knives and darts in combat. They are quick to
employ poison or other drugs on their weapons if they have some
special hatred for their opponent. Buckawn poisons are among
the most potent ones known to man, imposing a —4 penalty to all
saving throws made against them.

Habitat/Society: Buckawns are a reclusive folk. Only on the
rarest of occasions will a buckawn clan have anything to do with
other creatures, Further, it is worth noting that this attitude ap-
plies also to buckawns from other clans. While they are not in-
stantly attacked or driven away, strange buckawns are treated
with extreme caution until their motivations and capabilities are
known.

A buckawn clan lives in a single home carved into the bowels of
a great tree, More often than not, this is the largest tree in the for-
est. One third of the clan is charged with hunting the small ani-
mals the buckawn like to eat, while the rest of the band is split
evenly between domestic upkeep and gathering the fruits and
nuts that round out their diet. On rare occasions, a buckawn clan
may keep a herd of chipmunks or squirrels as livestock, thus elim-
inating the need to hunt.

Ecology: Buckawns are magical creatures that fit into the fabric
of wilderness life in much the same way that sprites, pixies, and
dryads do. They are a reflection of the life force in the woodlands;
so long as their woods are green and growing, the buckawn are
bright and alive, If any form of rot or decay works its way into
their corner of the world, the buckawn sicken and die if they can-
not overcome this enemy of the forest.

Buckawn poisons are very valuable because of their great po-
tency, While these are hard to come by, they are worth twice as
much as normal poisons.
Brownie, Quickling

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate/ Forests
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Clan
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night
DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: High to genius (13-18)
TREASURE: OROX jor
NO. APPEARING: 4-16
ARMOR CLASS: =3
MOVEMENT: 96
HIT DICE: Normal: 1+ 1-4 hp
Leaders: 3
Elders: 4
THACO: Normal: 19
Leaders and elders: 17
NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: By weapon (1-3/1-2)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil
SIZE: T (2’ tall)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: Normal: 2,000
Leaders: 3,000
Elders; 4,000

Although they were once much like any other race of brownies,
quicklings sought out dark and dangerous magical powers. It
may be that they intended to do good with their powers at one
time, but the evil magic was too strong for them and they were
corrupted.

Quicklings are small and slender beings. They look much like
miniature elves with very sharp, feral features. Their ears are un-
usually large and rise to points above their heads. Their eyes are
cold and cruel with a tiny spark of yellow light. Their skin is a
pale blue to blue white and their hair is often silver or snowy
white.

Quicklings dress in fine clothes of bright colors. They are fond
of silver and black, often selecting fabrics and metals in these col-
ors. Quicklings never wear any form of armor or cumbersome
clothes.

Quicklings speak a tongue very similar to that of brownies and
buckawns, but they speak very quickly. To those unfamiliar with
it, their speech is nothing but a meaningless stream of noise with
individual sounds and words passing so quickly that no human
can follow it. If quicklings wish to communicate with other be-
ings, they must take care to speak very slowly. Many quicklings
can speak either common, pixie, or halfling, while most of them
(85% ) can speak true brownie.

Combat: Quicklings are far more dangerous in combat than
their minute size would lead opponents to believe. This is due pri-
marily to the great speed at which they travel and their tremen-
dous agility. In combat, a quickling can dart about so rapidly that
it attacks three times in a single round. In addition, they are visi-
ble only as blurs when moving, giving them an excellent Armor
Class.

Quicklings are 100% invisible when not moving; when moving
they are 90% invisible. In areas that enable them to rapidly move
from cover to cover, like a forest or boulder-strewn field, they can
use their speed to make their chance of invisibility 100% . If they
are ever forced to roll a saving throw to avoid damage due to a
hostile action, they may do so as if they were 19th-level priests.

In combat, quicklings employ their sleek, needle-like daggers

 

 

 

 

 

to cause 1d3 points of damage to medium-sized or smaller foes
and 1d2 to larger ones. Quickling leaders (see “Habitat/Society”)
are 75% likely to employ poisoned blades that cause uncon-
sciousness if the victim fails a saving throw vs. poison (must be
rolled after each hit).

Quicklings have certain inherent magical powers they can em-
ploy at will. While these are truly spells, the quicklings need not
preform any sort of casting ritual to invoke them. Quicklings
simply will the spell to activate and it does so. Only one may be
active at any given time. Once per day they may invoke the fol-
lowing powers: ventriloquism, forget, levitate, shatter, dig, and
fire charm,

Habitat/Society: When the ancestors of the quicklings began to
experiment with the dark forces that eventually corrupted them,
they had no idea what the effects would be. Where once they were
a gentle race of woodland beings, quicklings are now savage
hunters and cruel killers. They regard al] other humanoids as ene-
mies to be hunted down and killed.

Quicklings live in extended family units, in the same way as
buckawns. Each group of quicklings is led by an individual who
has 3 Hit Dice. Clans with more than ten members have two such
leaders, as well as an elder who has 4 Hit Dice.

Quicklings dwell in places that are dark and evil. Adventurers
have reported encountering them in groves of twisted and wicked
looking trees, near poisoned or cursed springs, and in overgrown
areas once ruled by powerful chaotic beings.

As a rule, quicklings avoid contact with the outside world ex-
cept when it promotes their own evil ends. In some cases, they
have been known to deal with other evil races of magical natures
(like imps and quasits) or powerful evil wizards and priests. On
these occasions, the combination of such forces is a great danger
to all good beings in the area.

Ecology: Because of their greatly accelerated metabolism,
quicklings are the shortest lived of any sylvan race. They mature
less than a year after birth and are considered fully adult by the
time they turn two. Old age sets in when they reach ten years and
they often die before they turn 12. No known quickling has ever
lived beyond 15 without the aid of powerful magic.
Crypt Thing

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any/Tomb or grave area
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)
TREASURE: Zz
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 3
MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 6

THACO: 15

NO, OF ATTACKS: i
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-8
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Teleport
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (6’ tall)
MORALE: Fanatic (17-18)
XP VALUE: 650

Crypt things are strange undead creatures that sometimes guard
tombs, graves, and corpses. There are two types of crypt things—
ancestral and summoned. The former type are “natural” crea-
tures, while the others are called into existence by a wizard or
priest of at least 14th level.

A crypt thing looks like nothing more than an animated skele-
ton, save that it is always clothed in a flowing robe of brown or
black. Each eye socket is lit by a fierce, red pinpoint of light that is
almost hypnotic in its intensity.

Combat: Acrypt thing exists only to protect the bodies of those
who have been laid to rest in its lair. It acts only to defend its
crypt. Should grave robbers or vandals seek to enter and profane
the sanctity of its tomb, the crypt thing becomes instantly ani-
mated.

A crypt thing's first line of defense is a powerful variety of tele-
portation, which it can cast once on any given group of adventur-
ers. Each of those attacked with this spell must roll a successful
saving throw vs. spell or be instantly transported away from the
crypt. DMs should use the following table as a guideline, rolling
1d100 for each person who fails the saving throw, but they are
free to use their own judgment as well:

01-20 1d10 x 100’ north
21-40 1d10 x 100’ east

41-60 1d10 x 100’ west
61-80 1d10 x 100’ south
81-90 1 dungeon level up
91-00 1 dungeon level down

Those teleported by the crypt thing cannot materialize inside
solid matter, but they do not necessarily arrive at floor level. Par-
ticularly clever crypt things have been known to transport vic-
tims several hundred feet into the air or atop a vast chasm,
leaving them to fall to their deaths.

Once it has employed this power, a crypt thing attacks by claw-
ing with its skeletal hands for 1d8 points of damage.

A crypt thing can be hit only by magical weapons.

Like all undead, crypt things are immune to certain spells. It is
impossible to employ a charm, hold, or sleep spell against a crypt
thing with any chance of success. Crypt things are harmed by
holy water or holy symbols, as are many undead creatures. The
magic that roots them to their lairs is so powerful, in fact, that it
also eliminates any chance for priests or paladins to turn them.

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Crypt things are not a natural part of our
world; they have no organized society or culture. They are found
wherever tombs and crypts are located.

The most common crypt thing is the summoned variety. By use
of a 7th-level spell (see below), any caster capable of employing
necromantic spells can create a crypt thing.

Ancestral crypt things are the raised spirits of the dead that
have returned to guard the tombs of their descendants. This hap-
pens only in rare cases (determined by the DM).

Ecology: The crypt thing is not a being of this world and, thus,
has no proper ecological niche. It is rumored that the powdered
marrow from a crypt thing's bones can be used to create a potion
of undead control. In addition, anyone who employs the bones of
a crypt thing to manufacture a set of pipes of haunting is 80%
likely to create a magical item that imposes a -2 penalty to its vic-
tims’ saving throws and has double normal effectiveness if the
saving throws fail.

 

Create Crypt Thing
‘7th-level Wizard or Priest spell (necromantic)

(Reversible) |

Range: Touch Casting Time: 1 round
‘Components: V,S Area of Effect: 1 corpse
Duration: Permanent Saving Throw: None

This spell enables the caster to cause a single dead body to ani-
mate and assume the status of a crypt thing. This spell can be
cast only in the tomb or grave area the crypt thing is to pro-
tect; the spell requires that the caster touch the skull of the sub-
ject body. Once animated, the crypt thing remains until
destroyed. Only one crypt thing may guard a given tomb.

A successful dispel magic spell returns the crypt thing to its
original unanimated state. Attempts to restore the crypt thing
before this is done fail for any magic short of a wish.

The reverse of this spell, destroy crypt thing, utterly annihi-
lates any one such being as soon as it is touched by the caster.

 

 

The target is allowed a saving throw vs, death magic to avoid

 
Crystalmist

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate and subtropical/Mountains
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Swarm

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: — Speci
INTELLIGENCE: Non- (0)/Animal (1)
TREASURE; Nil

ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO, APPEARING: Swarm of 200 +1d100
ARMOR CLASS: 7

MOVEMENT: Fl 6 (A)

HIT DICE: 50 hp

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Light beams
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: T (1' diameter)
MORALE: Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 2,000

Crystalmists are interesting and unusual hive entities. Individual
crystalmists look much like snowflakes, drifting about in the air
and absorbing sunlight to power their crystalline structures. At
the heart of each crystalmist is a pulsating pinpoint of light that
gradually changes colors throughout the day.

When most people speak of a crystalmist, however, they are re-
ferring to the shape the swarm takes on when it is threatened. At
such times, the various individuals drift together to form a sphere
roughly one foot in diameter. The sphere throbs with a deep, omi-
nous sound and radiates a shimmering white light. The statistics
provided above are for this configuration; individuals are non-
intelligent, AC 10, have 1 hit point (thus there are 50 individuals
in a crystalmist community), no effective attack, and a move-
ment rate of 18.

Individual crystalmists are not intelligent enough to have any
language per se, but they are believed to have a rudimentary form
of communication within their species based on color modula-
tion.

Combat: While individual crystalmists have no combat capa-
bilities, they can quickly form into a community being that is
very dangerous. Coalescing into the larger form requires only one
round, during which time the crystalmist can be attacked with
impunity.

The globular crystalmist community can unleash a powerful
beam of light each round, using the energy stored in the bodies of
its component creatures. The beam has a range of 20 feet, beyond
which limit it is too diffuse to cause injury. A normal attack roll is
required for the crystalmist to hit a target with its beams. Each
successful strike inflicts 1d6 points of damage.

If the crystalmist fails to hit its target, but still rolls above a 3 on
its attack die, then the beam of light is assumed to have struck the
target, but been deflected by armor, a shield, or some other object
on the target's person (if possible). DMs should determine at ran-
dom what has been hit, taking into account relative sizes and po-
sitions of objects.

Any flammable object (such as a wooden shield or padded ar-
mor) hit by the light ray must roll a successful saving throw vs.
magical fire (see DMG page 39) or instantly ignite. Persons wear-

    

 

-

*

WO mI : fs =<

 

oe

     

 

 

 

ing clothing that bursts into flames suffer 1d4 points of damage
each round until they can extinguish the fire or remove the burn-
ing garb, Objects (such as lanterns) that contain very lammable
materials may actually explode (10% chance), doing damage as
the DM sees fit.

In addition to its light powers, the crystalmist is immune to a
number of spells. It cannot be affected by sleep, charm, illusion,
or other mind-altering spells. If the crystalmist is fighting in the
presence of a bright light source (such as a continual light spell),
the damage done by its beam is doubled to 2d6 points.

When a crystalmist suffers 10 points of damage, it fragments
into its individual components. Each point of damage inflicted
upon the community destroys one individual (thus 12 points of
damage means the community fragments into its 38 remaining in-
dividuals). The remaining individuals cannot form another com-
munity for five rounds.

Habitat/Society: As the individual crystalmists that make up a
crystalmist community have less intelligence than the average
grasshopper, they have no recognizable society. Still, they do
have a basic natural drive to remain with others of their kind and
form communities of several hundred individual crystalmists.

Crystalmist individuals reproduce rarely, by binary fission like
unicellular creatures.

Ecology: Crystalmists do not hunt, nor are they hunted. From
time to time they may be scooped out of the air by a passing bat or
avian in search of a few minerals to balance its diet, but as a rule
they are ignored by the animals around them.

It is believed that the mysterious timeglass of the mage was
crafted with ground crystalmists. While this has never been con-
firmed, it may indeed be true as the unique physiology of the cry-
stalmist makes it very valuable to those who have an interest in
arcane devices.

Other uses for the crystalmist include the creation of high qual-
ity smoke powder and dust of illusion. It is also rumored that the
priceless oracles of Greyhawk are fashioned from crystalmist col-
onies captured and trapped forever by powerful magic.
Dragons

 

 

The following information differs slightly from that published in
previous volumes of the Monstrous Compendium. This informa-
tion takes precedence over previously published material.

Dragons are an ancient, winged, reptilian race with many dis-
tinct subspecies. The ten best-known dragon subspecies are de-
tailed in Volume 1 of the Monstrous Compendium. Each of these
subspecies is known to exist in the Flanaess and environs. Four
additional subspecies are listed here; each is best known in the
Flanaess, but they might also dwell elsewhere.

Dragons range in size from several feet upon hatching to more
than 100 feet after they have attained the status of great wyrm.
The exact size varies according to age and subspecies, A dragon’s
wingspan is about equal to its body length; 15-20% of a dragon's
body length is neck.

Dragons, especially older ones, are generally solitary. They
distance themselves from civilization, which they consider to be a
petty and foolish mortal invention.

Although dragons’ goals and ideals vary among subspecies, all
dragons are covetous. They like to hoard wealth, collecting
mounds of coins and gathering as many gems, jewels, and magi-
cal items as possible. They find treasure pleasing to look at, and
they bask in the radiance of the magical items. For a dragon, there
is never enough treasure. Those with large hoards are loathe to
leave them for long, venturing out of their lairs only to patrol the
immediate area or to get food. Dragons like to make beds of their
treasure, shaping nooks and mounds to fit their bodies. By the
time they mature to the great wyrm stage, hundreds of gems and
coins are imbedded in their hides.

Dragons are fearsome predators, but they scavenge when nec-
essary and can eat almost anything if they are hungry enough.
Their metabolisms operate like highly efficient furnaces, consum-
ing 95% of all the food the dragons eat. Their digestive system
can also consume inorganic material; some dragons have devel-
oped a taste for such fare.

Generally, when multiple dragons are encountered they consist
of a mated pair and young. Mated pairs are never older than the
mature adult stage, and the young are of the young adult stage or
younger. To determine the age of the young dragons, roll a six-
sided die:

Egg
Hatchling
Very young
Young
Juvenile
Young adult

Oo tn im Go bo ee

i it t t w tt

During the early part of a dragon's young adult stage, it leaves its
parents to find a lair, start a hoard, and raise a family of its own.
Sometimes, although rarely, juvenile dragons leave their parents
to start their own lives. Once a pair of mated dragons ages be-
yond the mature adult stage, independence and the lust for trea-
sure drives them apart and they split up. Older dragons of either
sex sometimes raise young, but only on their own—the other par-
ent leaves when the eggs are laid.

Although all subspecies of dragons are believed to come from
the same roots tens of thousands of years ago, the present sub-
species keep to themselves, working together only under extreme
circumstances, though good dragons never work with evil drag-
ons. When evil dragons of different species encounter each other,
they usually fight to protect their territories. While good dragons
» of different subspecies are more tolerant of each other, they also
are territorial, but they usually work out their differences in a
more peaceful manner.

Dragon Senses: All dragons have excellent senses of sight,
smell, and hearing. Their enhanced senses enable them to detect

 

 

all invisible objects and creatures (including creatures or items
hidden in darkness or fog) within a radius equal to ten feet times
their age category. All dragons possess a natural clairaudience
ability with respect to their lairs; the range is 20 feet per age cate-
gory. The dragon must concentrate on a specific section within its
lair or surrounding area to hear what is going on.

Dragon Fear: Dragons can inspire panic or fear. The mere sight
of a young adult or older dragon causes creatures with fewer than
1 Hit Die (as well as all noncarnivorous, nonaggressive creatures
with fewer Hit Dice than the dragon) to automatically flee in
panic for 4d6 rounds.

Trained war mounts, organized military units, and single crea-
tures with 1 Hit Die or more, but with fewer Hit Dice than the
dragon are not panicked, but they may be stricken with fear if
they are within the dragon's fear aura. The aura’s size varies with
the dragon's age category. The aura surrounds attacking or charg-
ing dragons in the specified radius and in a path along the ground
directly beneath a flying dragon whose altitude is 250 feet or less.
Creatures not automatically panicked are entitled to saving
throws vs. petrification. Creatures failing their saving throws are
stricken with fear and fight with a —2 penalty to their attack and
damage rolls. The aura increases in power based on the age cate-
gory of the dragon; creatures subjected to the aura receive a sav-
ing throw bonus or penalty equal to the dragon’s combat
modifier, All creatures with Hit Dice equal to or greater than
those of the dragon are immune to the fear effect.

Dragon Attacks: All dragons have a claw/claw/bite attack
form and a breath weapon. The latter can be used three times a
day, once every three rounds. Dragons also employ the attack
forms of snatch, kick, tail slap, and wing buffet, if their age and
the prevailing conditions allow it; dragons also may plummet if
the DM decides to include it in the game (see following). Dragons
frequently divide their attacks between opponents, using the
more dangerous attacks, such as a bite, against the foes they per-
ceive to be the toughest.

A dragon's physical attacks are subject to its combat modifier,
which varies with the dragon's age category (the bonus applies to
damage rolls only). The modifier also determines the level at
which the dragon uses its magic. It also affects opponents’ saving
throws against certain dragon attacks.

A dragon's preferred attacks are, in order, its breath weapon,
magical abilities (or spells), and its physical attacks. A dragon
that breathes during a round of combat cannot also attack physi-
cally. Magical abilities (but not spells) can be used in addition to
any attacks, except the breath weapon.

Claw: A dragon can attack creatures to its front and sides with
its claws, If the dragon kicks with one rear leg, it can use only one
claw (the other must be used to maintain balance).

Bite: Because of a dragon's long neck, it can bite creatures to its
front or to either side.

Snatch: Only young adult and older dragons can snatch. This
occurs when a flying dragon dives and attempts to grab a creature
in one of its claws. A creature struck by this method is taken into
the air. There is a 50% chance that a snatched creature has its
arms pinned, and therefore cannot be physically attack the
dragon. Snatched creatures are sometimes taken to great heights
and dropped. The snatched creature can be squeezed in the claw
for automatic claw damage each round, or transferred to the
dragon's mouth (the transfer requires a successful attack roll). If
the transfer succeeds, the victim automatically suffers bite dam-
age each round; if it fails, the victim is dropped. Dragons of old
age and older can carry a victim in each claw, and they can try to
snatch two victims at once. Wyrms and great wyrms can carry
three victims, but one of the first two snatched must be transfer-
red from claw to mouth before the third can be snatched.
Dragons

 

Plummet: If the DM chooses to allow plummets, an airborne
dragon, or a dragon jumping and descending from at least 30 feet
above a target, can land on a victim. The dragon crushes and pins
opponents using its claws and tail, inflicting damage equal to its
bite. The dragon can crush as many creatures as its combat modi-
fier. The dragon rolls a separate attack against each creature af-
fected. Creatures that are missed are assumed to have escaped.
Creatures that are crushed must roll successful saving throws vs.
petrification or be pinned under the dragon, automatically suffer-
ing crushing damage during the next round unless the dragon
moves off them. If the dragon chooses to maintain the pin, the
victims must roll successful saving throws vs. petrification to get
free. The dragon's combat modifier applies as a penalty to all sav-
ing throw vs. the crush. A dragon cannot take any other actions
while plummeting or pinning.

Kick: Any dragon can kick creatures attacking it from behind.
A kick delivers claw damage, and creatures struck must roll their
Dexterity or less on 1d20 or be kicked back 1d6 feet, +1 foot per
age category of the dragon. Creatures knocked back must roll
successful saving throws vs. petrification (adjusted by the drag-
on's combat modifier) or fall. If the dragon attacks with one claw,
it can kick with only one hind leg (the other must be used to main-
tain balance). A dragon cannot slap with its tail while kicking.

Wing Buffet: Young adult and older dragons can employ their
wings in combat; targets must be at the dragon’s sides. The dam-
age inflicted is the same as a claw attack, and creatures struck
must roll their Dexterity or less on 1d20 or be knocked prone.

Tail Slap: Adult and older dragons can use their tails to attack
creatures to their rear and sides. A tail attack inflicts the same
damage as two claw attacks and affects as many targets as the
dragon's age category. The dragon rolls a separate attack against
each creature. Creatures struck must roll successful saving
throws vs. petrification (adjusted by the dragon's combat modi-
fier) or be stunned for 1d4+1 minutes. A tail slap can smash a
light wooden structure and even damage a cube of force (one
charge per two points of combat modifier, round down).

Stall: Any dragon flying near the ground can halt its forward
motion and hover for one round; it must land immediately there-
after. Once stopped, the dragon can attack with its bite and all
four legs, It can use its breath weapon instead, but rarely happens
since dragons can breathe on the wing. If a dragon stalls in an
area with lots of dust or loose earth, the draft from its wings cre-
ates a dust cloud with the same radius as its fear aura. Creatures
within the cloud are blinded, and no spell casting is possible. The
cloud lasts for one round.

 

Spells: Dragons learn their spells haphazardly over the years.
The DM should randomly determine which spells any particular
dragon knows. If the random determination indicates the same
spell more than once, the dragon can cast it more than once a day.
Dragons do not possess spell books; they simply sleeps, concen-
trate when they awakens, and remember their spells. Dragon
spells have only a verbal component; the spells have a casting
time of 1, regardless of level. Dragons cannot physically attack,
breathe, use their magical abilities, or fly (except to glide) while
casting a spell.

Dragon Defenses: A dragon's Armor Class improves as it gets
older. Old or older dragons are immune to normal missiles, as
their gem-encrusted hides deflect arrows and other small projec-
tiles. Large missiles (from catapults, giants, etc.) and magical mis-
siles affect them normally. Young adult and older dragons radiate
a personal aura that makes them resistant to hostile magic. This
aura gets stronger as the dragons age.

Dragon Flight: Despite their large size, dragons are graceful and
competent fliers. This is only partially due to their powerful
wings; a dragon's brain is imbued with a magical power that sup-
plements the action of the wings.

Dragons can climb at half speed and dive at double speed.

A dragon can change direction quickly by executing a
wingover maneuver. A dragon cannot gain altitude during the
round it executes a wingover, but it may dive. The maneuver en-
ables the dragon to make a turn of 120 to 240 degrees regardless of
its speed.

Diving dragons can strike with their claws with a +2 bonus to
their attack rolls. Dragons diving on land-bound opponents can
also strike with both wings, but then must land immediately after
attacking.

When engaging other flying opponents, dragons can either
claw or bite, but not both, An airborne dragon must glide to cast
spells (but innate abilities can be used any time). A gliding dragon
loses 1,000 feet of altitude per round, and its forward speed is
equal to one half its flight speed on the round before it began gli-
ding.

 

Table 1

Hit Die Combat Fear Fear Sav.

Category Age (yrs) Modifier Modifier Radius Modifier
1 Hatchling 0-5 =5 +1 Nil Nil
2 Very Young 6-15 nee +2 Nil Nil
3 Young 16-25 = +3 Nil Nil
4 Juvenile 26-50 Nil +4 Nil Nil
5 Young Adult 51-100 +1 +5 15 yards +3
6 Adult 101-200 +2 +6 20 yards +2
7 Mature Adult 201-400 +3 +7 25 yards +1

8 Old 401-600 +4 +8 30 yards 0

9 Very Old 601-800 +5. +9 35 yards =
10 Venerable 801-1,000 +6 +10 40 yards =2
11 Wyrm 1,001-1,200 +7 +11 45 yards -3
12 Great Wyrm 1,201 + +8 +12 50 yards —4
Dragon, Cloud

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical, subtropical, and
temperate/Clouds and mountains

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary or clan

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Special

INTELLIGENCE: Genius (17-18)

TREASURE: Special

ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1 (2-5)

ARMOR CLASS: 0 (base)

MOVEMENT: 6, F139 (C), Ip3

HIT DICE: 14 (base)

THACO: 7

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3+special

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-10/1-10/3-36

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Special

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Variable

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Variable

SIZE: G (66' base)

MORALE: Fanatic (17)

XP VALUE: Variable

Age Body Lgt. (’) Tail Lgt. (') AC Breath Weapon

1 11-24 4-3 2 2d6+2
2 24-41 8-16 2 3d6 +4
3 41-58 16-22 cl ddo+6
4 58-71 22-29 0 5d6+8
5 71-87 29-37 4 6d6+10
6 87-102 37-44 —2Z ¥do+12
7 102-117 44-51 =3 8d6+14
B 117-132 51-59 =—4 9d6o+16
9 132-148 59-66 =5 10d6+ 18
10 148-165 66-74 —6 11d6 +20
11 165-184 74-82 — 12d6 + 22
12 184-203 82-92 -8 13d6 +24

Cloud dragons are reclusive creatures that dislike intrusions. They rarely
converse, but if persuaded to do so they tend to be taciturn and aloof.
They have no respect whatsoever for creatures that cannot fly without as-
sistance from spells or devices.

At birth, cloud dragons have silver-white scales tinged with red at the
edges. As they grow, the red spreads and lightens to sunset orange. At the
mature adult stage and above, the red-orange color deepens to red gold
and almost entirely replaces the silver.

Cloud dragons speak their own tongue and a tongue common to all
neutral dragons. Also, 17% of hatchling cloud dragons can speak with
any intelligent creature. The chance to possess this ability increases 5%
per age category.

Combat: Cloud dragons are as likely to avoid combat (by assuming
cloud form) as they are to attack. When attacking, they use their breath
weapons to scatter foes, then cast solid fog and use their weather manipu-
lation abilities to blind and disorient their foes. When very angry, they
conjure storms with control weather spells, then they call lightning. They
like to use stinking cloud and control winds spells against flying oppo-
nents.

Breath Weapon/Special Abilities: A cloud dragon's breath weapon is an
icy blast of air that is 140 feet long, 30 feet high, and 30 feet wide. Crea-
tures caught in the blast suffer damage from cold and flying ice crystals.
Furthermore, all creatures three size classes or more smaller than the
dragon are blown head over heels for 2d12 feet, plus three feet per age cat-
egory of the dragon. Characters who can grab solid objects won't be car-
ried away unless they fail Strength checks; creatures with claws, suction
cups, etc., can avoid the effect if they have a suitable surface to cling to.

A cloud dragon casts its spells and uses its magical abilities at 6th level

 

 

 

 

Spells Wizard/Priest MR Treas. Type XP Value
Nil Nil Nil 3,000
Nil Nil Nil 6,000
Nil Nil. Nil 8,000
1 Nil WR, T 11,000
11 25% R, T 13,000
21 30 % RT 14,000
22 35% R, T 15,000
ee hk 40% R, 1, %, 2 17,000
33/11 45°% R, T,X, 2 18,000
43/21 50% R, T, X, Z 19,000
44/22 59% R,.T, X, 2x2 20,000
54/32 60% K, T,X, 2x2 21,000

plus its combat modifier,

Cloud dragons are immune to cold.

They can assume (or leave) a cohesive, cloud-like form at will, once per
round, In this form, they are 75% unlikely to be distinguished from nor-
mal clouds: when in cloud form, their Armor Class improves by -3 and
their magic resistance increases by 15%. Cloud dragons can use their
spells and innate abilities while in cloud form, but they cannot attack
physically or use their breath weapon. In cloud form, cloud dragons fly at
a speed of 12 (MC: A).

As they age, cloud dragons gain the following additional powers: Very
voung: salid fog twice a day. Young: stinking cloud twice a day. Juvenile:
create water twice a day (affects a maximum of three cubic yards [81 cubic
feet|), Adult: obscurement three times a day. Mature adult: call lightning
twice a day, Old: weather summoning twice a day. Very old: control
weather twice a day, Ancient: control winds twice a day.

Habitat/Society: Cloud dragons lair in magical cloud islands where
there is at least a small, solid floor for laying eggs and storing treasure.
Very rarely, they occupy cloud-shrouded mountain peaks

Cloud dragons are solitary 95% of the time. If more than one is encoun-
tered it is a single parent with offspring.

Ecology: Like all dragons, cloud dragons can eat just about anything.
They seem to subsist primarily on rain water, hailstones, and the occa-
sional bit of silver,

Because they lair in similar territories, cloud dragons come into conflict
with silver dragons. Despite their higher intelligence, cloud dragons usu-
ally lose such confrontations because of the silver dragons’ secondary
breath weapons and ability to muster allies.
Dragon, Greyhawk

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate/ Cities (rarely
Temperate/ Hills, plains, and forests)
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Special
INTELLIGENCE: Supra-genius (19-20)
TREASURE: Special
NO. APPEARING: 1
ARMOR CLASS: 0 (base)
MOVEMENT: 9, F130 (D), Sw 6
HIT DICE: 11 (base)
THACO: 9 (base)
NO. OF ATTACKS; 3+special
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-10/1-10/3-30
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Specia
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Variable
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Variable
SIZE: H (25’ base)
MORALE: Fanatic (17)
XP VALUE: Variable
Age Body Lgt. (") Tail Lgt. (‘) AC Breath Weapon
1 2-8 1-4 3 15'/1d4 +1
2 8-14 4:9 2 20'/2d4
3 14-20 ‘9-14 1 25' /2d4 +1.
4 20-26 14-19 0 30'/3d4
5 26-32 19-24 =I] 35'/3d4+1
6 32-38 24-29 —2 40'/d4d4
7 38-44 29-34. =3 45'/4d4 +1
8 44-50 34-39 -4 50'/5d4
9 50-56 39-44 =i 55'/5d4 +1
10 36-62 44-49 -6 60'/6d4
li 62-68 49-54 -7 65'/6d4 +1
12 68-74 54-59 -6 70'/7d4

Greyhawk dragons love to have human and demihuman companions,
and, unlike other species of dragons, prefer to live amid the hustle and
bustle of great cities. They often pose as sages, scholars, mages, or other
intellectuals,

At birth, a Greyhawk dragon's scales are deep blue-gray with steely
highlights. As the dragon approaches adulthood, its color slowly lightens
to that of lustrous burnished steel. When these dragons take human form,
they always have one steel-gray feature—hair, eyes, nails, or sometimes a
ring or other ornament.

Greyhawk dragons speak their own tongue and a tongue common to all
neutral dragons. Also, 19% of hatchling Greyhawk dragons can speak
with any intelligent creature. The chance to possess this ability increases
5% per age category.

Combat: Greyhawk dragons favor repartee over combat. If pressed,
they usually begin with a spell assault and avoid melee. If seriously
harmed or threatened, they resume their dragon forms and use their
breath weapons. They always breathe on any foe they plan to engage in
melee, and they seek to keep their foes within the cloud until the gas loses
its potency.

Breath Weapon/Special Abilities: A Greyhawk dragon's breath weapon
is a cube of toxic gas. The dragon can monitor the amount of gas released
so closely that it can make the cube as small as it wishes, or as large as
shown in the table above. The listing is the maximum length of a side of
the cube. Creatures caught in the gas must roll successful saving throws
vs. poison, with a —2 penalty, or die instantly. The gas is quickly ab-
sorbed through the skin and is just as lethal if inhaled. Coating all exposed
skin with lard or grease offers some protection (saving throw penalty ne-
gated). Victims who succeed with the save automatically suffer the indi-
cated amount of damage unless immune to poison. In still air, the gas
stays active for two melee rounds.

 

 

 

 

 

Spells Wizard/Priest

Nil 25% Nil 2,000
Nil 30% Nil 4,000
‘Nil 35%: Nil 8,000
4 40% E.R 10,000
44 45% H, R 12,000
444 50% H,R 14,000
4444 55% H, R 15,000
44444 60% H, Rx2. 17,000
444444 65% H, Rx2 18,000
§44444/2 70% H, Rx2 19,000
§54444/22 73% H, Rx3 20,000
555444/222 80% H, Rx3 21,000

Greyhawk dragons are immune to all poisons.

A Greyhawk dragon can polymorph self five times a day, Each change
in form lasts until the dragon chooses a different form. Reverting to the '
dragon's normal form does not count as a change.

Greyhawk dragons are immune to wizard spells of 1st-4th level,

As they age, they gain the following additional powers: Young: cantrip
twice a day. Juvenile: friends once a day. Adult: charm person three times
a day. Mature adult: suggestion once a day. Old: enthrall once a day.

A Greyhawk dragon casts its spells and uses its special abilities at 8th
level plus its combat modifier.

Habitat'Society: Greyhawk dragons prefer human lodgings, but always
ones that are well equipped with strong rooms or vaults to protect their
treasures.

Greyhawk dragons prefer human form to their own, and they always
have mortal companions. They are endlessly curious about human and
demihuman art, culture, history, and politics. In their human identities,
Greyhawk dragons often are well-known patrons of the arts. They al-
ways keep their true natures secret, but they are able to recognize each
other.

Ecology: Greyhawk dragons prefer human food. Unlike other form-
shifting dragons, they cannot live on such fare indefinitely, as they must
eat enough to maintain their true bulk. Once or twice a month, they leave
their adopted cities and go into the wilderness to hunt for food. They ex-
plain their absences in a way consistent with their human identities. For
example, a dragon posing as a historian might claim to be out looking at
ruins or questioning a grizzled survivor of an old battle.

Greyhawk dragons hate chaotic creatures who seek to disrupt life in cit-
ies or despoil their hunting grounds, In the city the dragons never hesitate
to report troublemakers or to use their special abilities to hunt down crim-
inals. In the wilderness, they prefer swifter forms of justice.
Dragon, Mist

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical and subtropical/Forests, lake
shores, sea shores, and river banks
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary or clan
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Special
INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (15-16)
TREASURE: Special
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1 (2-5)
ARMOR CLASS: 1 (base) or —2 (base)
MOVEMENT: 12, Fl 39 (C), Sw 12
HIT DICE: 11 (base)
THACO; | 9 (base)
NO. OF ATTACKS: 3+special
DAMAGE/ATTACK: = 2-5/2-5/2-24
SPECIAL ATTACKS: = Special
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Variable
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil or 15%
SIZE: G (54' base)
MORALE: Champion (16 base)
XP VALUE: Variable
Age Body Lgt. (') Tail Let. () AC Breath Weapon
1 7-19 6-16 4 2d6 +1
2 19-31 16-28 3 3d6 +2
3 31-43 28-38 2 4d6+3
4 43-55 38-50 1 Sd6+4
5 55-67 50-60 0 6d6+5
6 67-80 60-70 =! 7dé6+6
7 80-93 70-84 = - 8d6+7
8 93-106 84-95 —3 9d6+8
9 106-120 95-108 —d 1odé+9
10 120-134 108-121 =5 11dé+10
11 134-148 121-133 —o 12d6+11
12 148-162 133-146 —7F 13d6+12

Mist dragons are solitary and philosophical. Their favorite activity is sit-
ting quietly and thinking. They hate being disturbed and dislike conversa-
tion.

At birth, a mist dragon's scales are shiny blue-white. As the dragon
ages, the scales darken, becoming blue-gray with metallic silver flecks
that sparkle in sunlight.

Mist dragons speak their own tongue and a tongue common to all neu-
tral dragons. Also, 15% of hatchling mist dragons can speak with any in-
telligent creature. The chance to possess this ability increases 5% per age

category.

Combat: Mist dragons try to avoid encounters by assuming mist form.
In combat, they quickly use their breath weapons, then assume mist form
and hide in the vapor—where they launch a spell assault.

Breath Weapon/Special Abilities: A mist dragon's breath weapon is a
cloud of scalding vapor that is 90 feet long, 30 feet wide, and 30 feet high.
Creatures caught in vapor suffer can roll saving throws vs. breath weapon
for half damage. In still air, the vapor persists for 1d4 +4 rounds; on the
second round, it condenses into a clammy, smothering fog that blinds air-
breathing creatures for 1d4 rounds and inflicts 3d4 points of drowning
damage per round for as long as the creature remains in the cloud (a suc-
cessful saving throw vs. breath weapon negates both effects).

A mist dragon casts its spells and uses its magical abilities at 6th level
plus its combat modifier.

Mist dragons are immune to fire and heat.

Mist dragons can assume (or leave) a cohesive, mist-like form at will,
once per round. In this form, they are 75% unlikely to be distinguished
from normal mist; in mist form, their Armor Class improves by —3 and

 

 

 

 

Spells Wizard/Priest MR Treas, Type XP Value
Nil Nil Nil 1,400
Nil Nil. ‘Nil 3,000
Nil Nil Nil 5,000
1 Nil ¥,Z 8,000
11 25% X,Y, 2 10,000
21 30% xX, ¥Z 11,000
22 35% XYZ 12,000
32/1 40% X,Y, Zx2 14,000
33/11 45% X,Y) ad 15,000
43/21 50% X,Y 2x2 16,000
44/22 55% X. ¥, Zx3 17,000
s4/32 60% X, Y, 2x3 18,000

their magic resistance increases by 15%. They can use their spells and in-
nate abilities while in mist form, but they cannot attack physically or use
their breath weapon. Mist dragons in mist form can fly at a speed of 9
(MC: A),

As they age, they gain the following additional powers: Very young:
water breathing twice a day. Young: wall of fog twice a day. Juvenile: cre-
ate water twice a day (affects a maximum of three cubic yards (81 cubic
feet]). Adult; control winds three times a day. Mature adult: wind wall
twice a day. Old: solid fog twice a day. Very old: predict weather twice a
day. Ancient: airy water twice a day.

Habitat/Society: Mist dragons live near waterfalls, rapids, coastlines. or
where rainfall is frequent and heavy. Their lairs are usually large natural
caverns or grottoes that are mist-filled and damp. Forest-dwelling mist
dragons occasionally come into conflict with green dragons. Mist dragons
greatly resent the green dragons’ attempts to intimidate or dominate
them; they usually spend several months vainly trying to avoid a green
dragon's advances before losing all patience and launching an all-out cam-
paign to destroy or drive away the aggressor. Likewise, coastal mist drag-
ons might have bronze dragons for neighbors. This, however, seldom
leads to conflict as both dragons are content to leave the other alone.

Mist dragons are loners, and 90% of all encounters are with individ-
uals, Group encounters are with parents and offspring.

Ecology: Mist dragons can eat almost anything, including woody plants
and even mucd. However, they draw most of their sustenance directly
from natural mist or spray. They often lie in misty or foggy places, think-
ing and basking in the moisture.

 
Dragon, Shadow

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Non-arctic/Ruins, subterranean, and
plane of Shadow
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary or clan
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Nocturnal (any on the plane of
Shadow)
DIET: Special
INTELLIGENCE: Genius (17-18)
TREASURE: Special
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1 (2-5)
ARMOR CLASS: ~4 (base)
MOVEMENT: 18, Fl 30 (D), Jp 3
HIT DICE: 12 (base)
THACO: 9 (base)
NO. OF ATTACKS: 3+special
DAMAGE/ATTACK:  1-6/1-6/3-18
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Special
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Variable
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Variable
SIZE: H (21' base)
MORALE: Champion (16)
XP VALUE: Variable
Age Body Lgt. (') Tail Lgt. (°) AC Breath Weapon
1 1-4 1-3 a 1d44+1
z 4-1] 3-8 Te 1d4+2
3 11-18 #13 =3 2d4 +1
4 18-23 13-18 -4 2d4+2
5 23-29 18-23 =—5 3d4+1
6 29-36 23-28 -6 3d4 +2
o 36-42 28-33 iad 4d4+1
8 42-48 33-38 =$ 4d4 +2
9 48-55 38-43 =9 S5d4+1
10 55-61 43-48 -10 5d4+2
li 61-67 48-53 -11 6d4+1
12 67-74 53-58 -12 éd4 +2

Shadow dragons are sly and devious. They are instinctively cunning and
are not prone to taking risks.
At all ages, a shadow dragon's scales and body are translucent, so that
when viewed from a distance it appears to be a mass of shadows.
Shadow dragons speak their own tongue and a tongue common to all
evil dragons. Also, 17% of hatchling shadow dragons can speak with any
intelligent creature. The chance to possess this ability increases 5% per

age category.

Combat: Shadow dragons prefer to attack from hiding, usually employ-
ing invisibility or hiding in shadows. They use illusion/phantasm spells to
confuse and misdirect foes. Older dragons are especially fond of their
non-detection ability.

Breath Weapon/Special Abilities: A shadow dragon's breath weapon is
a cloud of blackness that is 40 feet long, 30 feet wide, and 20 feet high.
Creatures caught in the cloud are blinded for one melee round and lose 3/4
(round up) of their life energy (levels or Hit Dice); a successful saving
throw vs. breath weapon reduces the loss to '/2 (round up). The life en-
ergy loss persists for a variable number of turns, shown on the table
above. Negative plane protection spells prevent this life energy loss.

A character who is reduced to 0 or fewer levels lapses into a coma for
the duration of the cloud’s effect.

A shadow dragon casts spells and uses its magical abilities at 6th level
plus its combat modifier.

Shadow dragons are born immune to energy draining and with the abil-
ity to hide in shadows with 40% chance of success; this ability increases
5% per age Category to a maximum of 95%.

As they age, they gain the following additional powers: Juvenile: mir-
ror image three times a day (1d4 +1 images). Adult: dimension door twice

 

 

 

 

 

Spells Wizard/Priest MR XP Value
Nil 5% Nil 4,000
Nil 10% Nil 6,000
Nil 15% < Nil 8,000
2 20% 2H, 5 10,000
22 25% H, 5 11,000
222 430% H, 5 13,000
2222/1 35% HS 15,000
22222/2 40% H, Sx2 17,000
2222202 /3 45% H, Sx2 18,000
422222/31 50% H, 5x2 19,000
442222/32 55% H, 5x3 20,000
444222/33 60% H, 5x3 21,000

a day. Old: non-detection three times a day. Venerable: shadow walk once
a day. Great wyrm: create shadows three times a day. (This ability creates
a mass of leaping shadows with a radius of 100 yards, duration one hour.
All magical [and normal] light and darkness sources are negated for as
long as they remain in the radius. Creatures able to hide in shadows can
do so in these magical shadows even if under direct observation, Shadow
dragons and other creatures from the plane of Shadow can move and at-
tack normally while hiding in these shadows, effectively giving them im-
proved invisibility, A successful dispel magic spell banishes the shadows.)

Habitat/Society: Shadow dragons hate both bright light and total dark-
ness, preferring variegated lighting with patches of diffuse light and deep,
inky shadows. On the Prime Material plane, their lairs are always places
that provide shadowy light for most of the day. They prefer ancient ruins,
where they can hide underground when the sun is bright and still find
shadows above ground during dawn and twilight. In the plane of
Shadow, they live in dense thickets of trees and brambles, fortified cas-
tles, or labyrinthine caves. In either plane, they prefer to locate their lairs
near colonies of other creatures that can alert them to potential foes or vic-
tims, The dragons seldom actually cooperate with these allies, however,
though the dragons commonly prey on them.

Shadow dragons love dark-colored, opaque gems, and especially prize
black stones, They also collect magical items that produce shadows or
darkness. They use these items to turn areas filled with total darkness or
light into masses of shadows.

Ecology: Shadow dragons eat almost anything. Their favorite food is
rotting carrion, though they often kill for sport. Slain victims are left to
decay until they become suitably foul. These dragons are equally fond of
frost-killed, waterlogged, or salt-poisoned plants.
Dragonfly, Giant

 

 

 

 

 

Adult Larva (Nymph)
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical, Tropical,
subtropical, and subtropical, and
temperate/Jungles, temperate/Fresh
forests, and water
swamps
FREQUENCY: Rare Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary or swarm Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day Any
DIET: Carnivore Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Animal (1) Animal (1)
TREASURE: Nil Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1-6 1
ARMOR CLASS: 3 3
MOVEMENT: 3, Fl 36 (B) 9, Sw 3 (jet 24)
HIT DICE: 7 (8+2-8) 6+1 (7 +2)
THACO: 13 (11) 15 (13)
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 3-12 (4-16) 3-18 (4-24)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Initiative bonus Surprise bonus
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Darting Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil Nil
SIZE: M (6'-8" long) M (43/2'-6')
MORALE: Steady (11-12) Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 1,400 (2,000) 650 (975)

Giant dragonflies, like their smaller counterparts, are swift and
deadly aerial hunters. While their smaller cousins are generally
beneficial, the giant variety is a dangerous predator that attacks
any creature its size or smaller.

Adult giant dragonflies are famous for their brilliant metallic
colors; common hues are green, blue, and gold. Stripped and
spotted individuals have been reported. All adult giant dragon-
flies have two identical pairs of transparent wings that show dark
veins in an sparkling amber membrane. A dragonfly’s six legs are
long and delicate, so the insect can at best balance lightly ona tree
branch or other perch. The legs are tightly bunched where they
join the body, but spread out at angles so the dragonfly can clench
them together to form a large basket.

Combat: A giant dragonfly’s four wings enable it to hover and
to dart with blinding speed. They gain a —3 bonus to all initiative
rolls; if they win initiative, they can dart into melee and zip out of
range before their opponents can make return melee attacks. A
darting dragonfly also can avoid missile attacks. When a giant
dragonfly has initiative, missile attacks directed against it suffer a
—4 penalty. Even when the dragonfly loses initiative, missile at-
tacks against it suffer a —2 penalty. When attacking creatures of
tiny or small size, a dragonfly scoops its victim into its leg basket
and devours it in midair. Once caught in the basket, the creature
automatically suffers bite damage each round until completely
devoured. When attacking larger creatures, a dragonfly darts in
to bite with its mandibles.

Habitat/Society: Since they tend to attack and devour anything
they see, giant dragonflies do not form organized groups. Never-
theless, several of them hunting in the same general area may at-
tempt massed attacks against less agile opponents, After such a
gang attack, however, any crippled dragonflies are likely to be-
come the next victims.

 

 

 

 

 

Ecology: Giant dragonflies mate and breed on the wing and
near water, where they prefer to hunt. However, they are strong
fliers and often are encountered over dry land, miles from water.
Generally, they prey on other flying giant insects, but they take
warm-blooded prey when they can get it. Giant dragonflies can-
not tolerate freezing temperatures, but they are found in nearly
every non-polar climate except deserts. In tropical areas, giant
dragonflies tend to be even bigger. These larger specimens use the
statistics in parentheses.

Giant dragonfly eggs hatch in 12-20 days, depending on the
temperature. Once hatched, a dragonfly remains in larva! form
for about a year. In temperate climates, the larvae hibernate
through the winter, emerging as adults the next spring.

A giant dragonfly’s wings have no special value, but its glitter-
ing, metallic skin is highly prized in some areas for use in apparel
and decoration. Magically preserved skin can bring up to 600 gp
per square foot (a typical specimen yields six square feet of skin;
tropical specimens can yield about eight square feet).

Larvae

Dragonfly larvae are sometimes called nymphs. These creatures
are every bit as voracious as the adults, but they are flightless and
completely aquatic. They are poor swimmers, however. Instead
they lurk on the bottoms of lakes or ponds, hiding in burrows,
weed beds, or fallen debris and waiting to ambush prey. Their ab-
domens are equipped with organs that can expel a powerful jet of
water once every two rounds. When jetting out of cover to the at-
tack, a nymph surprises victims 50% of the time. Dragonfly
nymphs are armed with mandibles even more formidable than
those of adults. Furthermore, these mandibles are covered by a
rubbery, lip-like organ when not in use; so even if the nymph is
spotted before the attack, it often appears to be an inoffensive,
toothless creature.
Dragonnel

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: = Any/Non-arctic (mostly the Pomarj)
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary or band
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Semi- (2-4)

TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Neutral (evil)

NO. APPEARING: 1-4

ARMOR CLASS: Variable (typically 3)
MOVEMENT: 12, Fl 18 (C; D if mounted)
HIT DICE: 8+4

THACO: nu

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6/1-6/4-16

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Tail slap (2-12)
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: H (24')
MORALE: Elite (13)
XP VALUE: 2,000

Dragonnels are distantly related to both dragons and pterano-
dons. Their four legs, huge wings, and long tails give them a
dragon-like appearance, and from a distance it is easy to mistake
a dragonnel for one of its more fearsome cousins. Nevertheless,
dragonnels are a distinct species, not a dragon subspecies. Closer
inspection reveals a dragonnel's toothy beak and warty, dinosaur-
like hide.

At hatching, a dragonnel is glossy black with a red underbelly.
As the creature ages, its underbelly fades to gray and its sides be-
come dark red-violet. An adult dragonne! has long, maroon-
colored spines on its back and white frills on its head.

Most dragonnels cannot speak, but 4% of wild adults can
speak the tongue common to all evil dragons. Though not very
bright, they tend to be evil, cunning, and malicious.

Combat: Dragonnels have no breath weapons; in battle, they
strike with their clawed forefeet and bite with their beaks. If they
do not attack with their claws, they can lash opponents behind
with their tails.

Habitat/Society: Unlike their cousins, the dragons, wild dra-
gonnels are mildly social, gathering for mutual defense, coopera-
tive hunting, and to mate. Males in their prime stay away from
other males, collecting small, semi-permanent harems of females.
Females leave the band to lay eggs secretly, burying them in
warm, moist earth. Once the eggs are laid, the females abandons
them, often rejoining their old band, but sometimes remaining
solitary until they find a new one.

Dragonnels are sometimes used as mounts for war and raiding;
evil humans living among the humanoids of the Pomarj are the
best-known dragonnel riders. Dragonnels carrying riders can fly
at full speed if the total load does not exceed 360 pounds. How-
ever, if the load exceeds 100 pounds they lose maneuverability,
which falls to the rating shown in parentheses. Dragonnels can-
not (or will not) fly when carrying loads exceeding 360 pounds.
Dragonnels can run at full speed carrying loads of up to 540
pounds, but if forced carry greater loads, they simply sit down
and refuse to move. When serving as mounts they sometimes are

 

 

 

 

 

 

equipped with leather barding, which lowers their AC to 2.
Leather dragonnel barding weighs 180 pounds and costs 600 gp.

Needless to say, dragonnels are difficult to train, and they serve
as mounts only grudgingly. Wild, adult dragonnels cannot be
trained, although evil beings might be able to entice talking dra-
gonnels into cooperating. During such negotiations, dragonnels
are as vain and greedy as their cousins, the dragons. Normally a
prospective dragonnel trainer must find a clutch of eggs, hatch
them, and train them for about five years.

A trained dragonnel is controlled with a short goad with a
metal tip and a weighted butt, and with four reins, one pair at-
tached to each of the creature's jaws. Even trained dragonnels are
untrustworthy mounts; more than one careless rider has received
a painful, if not fatal, bite when approaching his steed unwarily
and without a sharp goad in hand.

Ecology: Dragonnels are at home in almost any climate except
the coldest and driest. At one time, they ranged the Flanaess from
the Kron Hills and the Glorioles to the Drachensgrab Mountains,
but they are now virtually extinct everywhere except the Pomarj,
where they are used as steeds.

Dragonnel eggs are laid in clutches of 1d6 +2. If incubated un-
der warm, moist conditions, they hatch in 12 weeks. Hatchling
dragonnels can fly almost immediately and mature in about three
years.

Wild dragonnels prefer to hunt and kill large animals, such as
cattle, elk, horses, or even an occasional human or demihuman.
However, when necessary they scavenge or hunt nearly anything
living—rodents, fish, humanoids, or anything else they can
catch. Unlike dragons, they are true carnivores and cannot eat
plants or exotic foods like gems or minerals. Domestic dragonnels
thrive only on red meat, usually the equivalent of two horses or
cows every month.

Although they have no natural enemies, wild dragonnels are
hunted by humans, whose herds and flocks they raid, and by all |
species of dragons. Good dragons abhor their stupidity and evil |
tendencies. Evil dragons simply resent the competition.
Elf, Grugach

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate/Deep forests
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Bands

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average to genius (11-18)
TREASURE: N,Q

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral

NO. APPEARING: 20-80

ARMOR CLASS: 6 (10)

MOVEMENT: 15

HIT DICE: 1+1

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-8 (weapon)

SPECIAL ATTACKS: +1 with bow and spear
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Traps

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 90% to sleep and charm spells
SIZE: M (4-5’ tall)

MORALE: Elite (13-14)

XP VALUE: 120

The grugach are wild elves, akin to sylvan or wood elves, but
smaller, lighter, and very pale. When not in their tribal bands,
they dress in leather armor decorated with the shapes of leaves or
of the animals of the deep forest. Except where otherwise noted,
grugach conform to the specifics of wood elves and of elves in
general.

While it is true that many bands of wood elves are secretive and
even dangerous when stumbled upon, it is the grugach who have
given the wood elves a reputation for ruthless xenophobia. As a
rule, a party that meets with a band of elves who do not speak
common (grugach speak only elvish, treant, and certain other
sylvan creatures’ tongues) should consider themselves in trouble.

onto Grugach are fierce fighters, and they are the strongest
of the elven races. Characteristically wide at the shoulders, gru-
gach add +2 to their Strength scores (treat 19 as 18[01] and 20 as
18(51]). They are not as well-versed in the use of the sword as are
other elves, as there's little space to swing a sword in the dense
virgin woodlands where the grugach live. They make up for this
by gaining a +1 bonus to their attack roll with a spear, as well as
with a bow.

Grugach are very skilled at setting traps. These consist princi-
pally of pits and snares in and around their home territory. All
such traps are well-concealed, and there is a 90% chance that
creatures passing near the trap stumble into it. If characters pass-
ing through a trapped area examine their surroundings carefully
(reducing their movement to 3, and taking pains to look where
they step), the likelihood of triggering a trap is reduced to 30%.
Once a trap is triggered, the character's chance to escape must be
weighed on a case-by-case basis, depending upon the nature of
the trap and the awareness the victim has regarding his danger.
As a general rule, a character should have to roll a saving throw
against breath weapon, with a —2 penalty.

Pit traps are normally ten feet deep and spiked at the bottom.
Damage is 1d4 (fall onto the earth-floored pit), plus 1d4 +2 spikes
for 1d6 points of damage each, plus any poison that might have

 

 

 

 

 

been applied to the spikes. Snares are usually set to encircle and
jerk creatures off their feet and suspend them five feet or more
above the ground. Some snares can be deadfalls, where a heavy
log crashes down for 6d6 of damage and pins the victim as well.

Poisoned spikes and deadfalls are usually employed in case the
creature has actually entered the grugach’s territory.

Grugach have no wizards, but there are multi-classed fighter/
druids. These characters fight to keep the woods clean of civiliza-
tion, and to keep unwanted strangers away.

Habitat/Society: Grugach are a type of wood elves who long
ago withdrew into the deep forests. They welcome no intrusions
on their territory, not even by other elves, or such woods-loving
people as druids. Two old elven poems cite this as the reason that
the grugach enjoy the effects of animal friendship with the ani-
mals of the forest. Indeed, grugach might ride stags as steeds.

Bands of grugach consist of about six family units of five to ten
elves each, living in a wide-spread camp of several ground-level
or tree-level huts. If intruded upon by well-meaning but innocent
characters, the grugach immediately capture the intruders and
lead them, drugged and blindfolded, to distant areas of the woods
where the intruders might be released without endangering the se-
curity of the grugach. If the intruders are evil, or if they offer re-
sistance to the grugach, the wild elves almost certainly attack to
kill.

Grugach seem particularly attracted to platinum, a metal they
find beautiful and well-suited for their jewelcraft. Grugach are
sometimes hunted for their riches, but thieves who attempt this
are usually disappointed by the small amount of treasure carried
by grugach (thieves are also horrified by the dedication the wild
elves demonstrate in hunting down such villains).

Ecology: The grugach live in harmony with their surroundings.
They are the only intelligent race in their neck of the woods. They
dedicate themselves to protecting the woods against intrusion by
other intelligent races.
Elf, Valley

 

  

 

GEASS F

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate/ Hills
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Bands

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: High to supra-genius (14-20)
TREASURE: M,N, (G, S, T)
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral

NO. APPEARING: 10-40 or 20-240
ARMOR CLASS: 4 (10)

MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 1+2

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 or more
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-8 (by weapon)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: +1 with bow or sword
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 90% to sleep and charm spells
SIZE: M (5-6’ tall)
MORALE; Steady (11)

XP VALUE: 420

Whether a separate race of elvenkind or simply an offshoot of
gray elves, the elves of the Valley of the Mage have distinctive fea-
tures and characteristics. In the WORLD OF GREYHAWK® fan-
tasy world setting, they are found only in the immediate vicinity
of the Valley of the Mage. They are known as valley elves to most
races, but other elves use a derogatory term implying the status of
slaves or created things rather than servants or allies.

Other than the distinctive attributes described below, valley
elves conform closely to the characteristics of gray elves, and of
elvenkind in general.

Valley elves are as tall as most humans, but thin with sharp and
pointed features. Their hair is pale yellow in the summer, darken-
ing to a rich gold in the winter months. They dress in blues and
greens, usually in garments that are loose and flowing. When nec-
essary, valley elves can pass as humans. (Indeed, the Mage of the
Valley is rumored to have valley elf spies and assassins arrayed in
a network stretching across several kingdoms.) Like most other
elves, their preferred weapons are the bow and the long sword.
Many valley elves own and wear suits of chain mail.

Combat: The elves of the Valley of the Mage have been known
to raid other territories, probably at the behest of their liege.
They are also a loyal home guard, patrolling the Mage’s lands,
more or less in cooperation with gnomes and strange, fierce mon-
sters. Wherever they are encountered, valley elves are quick to
initiate combat.

The typical valley elf is a fighter/wizard of Ist/1st level (only
25% of the elves are unable to cast spells). Valley elves are most
often encountered in squads of 10d4. Spell choice and weapon use
is coordinated. (For example, a wall of sword-wielding elves will
protect a second rank of archers and a third rank of elves wielding
offensive spells.) However, once such simple coordination is
worked out, valley elves have no feel for tactics, Fighters, partic-
ularly those carrying swords, are not inclined to worry much
about group tactics in combat; each fighter’s tactics are intelligent
and well-thought-out, but they may not mesh well with the intel-
ligent plans of his neighbor.

Valley elves are excellent horsemen, though they do not ride

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

other mounts. They rarely fight from horseback, preferring to
ride up to a foe, dismount, and engage on foot.

For every five valley elves encountered, there is an additional
fighter/wizard of 2nd/2nd level. For every ten, there is an addi-
tional leader of 3rd/3rd level. If more than 30 elves are encoun-
tered, the squad is led by an elf of 6th/5th level, with two
assistants, each 4th/4th level. These leaders expect their orders to
be obeyed; they can occasionally counteract the individuality dis-
played by valley elves at war.

Wandering bands of valley elves often (75 %) have 1d4 cooshee
(elven dogs) as guards.

Habitat/Society: The Valley of the Mage is a dangerous place,
with wild monsters let loese to discourage visitors, subtle traps,
and other hazards. Rather than being at risk, though, the valley
elves are part of the danger. The elves obey their liege and his First
Protector (a female drow in charge of defenses against unwar-
ranted intrusions) and are in turn kept safe from the lands they
patrol.

Occasionally, a visitor stumbles onto one of the bands of valley
elves, settled among the hills. The elves know that none of the
Mage's invited visitors is supposed to encounter them, and so
they attack with intent to capture the intruders and take them to
the First Protector. Communities have 2d4 cooshee, as well as a
council leader, traditionally a valley elf of 5th to 8th level as a
fighter, and between 4th and 7th level as a wizard. Valley elves are
by nature reclusive and predisposed to resent most other races,
except gnomes, whom they tolerate.

Other elves dislike valley elves, believing that they have sold
out their most valued treasure, their independence, to the Mage.
They are also less than enthusiastic about valley elves taking or-
ders from a drow.

Ecology: The Mage provides for most of the valley elves needs,
and they forage for the rest. In return they serve the Mage as
agents and guards. They have raided Bessel, the Gran March,
Ket, and the Duchy of Geoff.
Giant-kin, Voadkyn

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: ‘Temperate and subtropical/Forests

FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Clan

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Herbivore
INTELLIGENCE: High to exceptional (13-16)
TREASURE: E

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic good

 

NO. APPEARING: 1-4

ARMOR CLASS: 8 (5 in armor)

MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 7+7

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: _ ae eee +3to +6 (Strength
Ons.

SPECIAL ATTACKS: -—4 penalty to opponents’ surprise rolls

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Resistant to some spells

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: L (9%/2' tall)

MORALE: Steady (11-12)

XP VALUE: 2,000

Wood giants (also known as voadkyn) are one of the smallest of
the minor races of giants, looking somewhat like giant-sized
wood elves, They are flighty, frivolous, and good friends with
_ wood elves.

Standing 97/2 feet tall, wood giants weigh around 700 pounds.
They have the physical proportions of humans, which makes
them thin and light for giants, They are completely devoid of fa-
cial and body hair, including eyebrows. Their heads seem overly
large for their bodies, especially the jaws, chin, and mouth. Their
ears are placed higher than on a human, almost completely above
the line of the eyes.

Wood giants can be almost any shade of brown, mixed with
yellow or green. They are fond of leather armor and ring mail. A
wood giant carries two weapons—a two-handed sword and a
giant-sized long bow with quiver. A special sheath for the sword
is steel tipped, enabling it to be used as a walking stick. This does
not in any way disguise the sword.

They wrap their ankles in leather strips almost up to the knee,
although the foot itself is mostly bare, The only garments they
wear are loose trousers or a short kilt. A wood giant always wears
a leather forearm sheath to protect his arm from the bowstring.
All of these items are frequently stained in forest colors of green
and brown.

Combat: Voadkyn do not fight unless forced to defend them-
selves or allies. Their favorite weapon is their huge, non-magical
long bow. They get a +1 bonus to attack rolls and 50% better
range because of its unusual size. The matching arrows are over
four feet long and cause 1d8 points of damage. Wood giants do
not hurl rocks or boulders. If pressed into melee, they wield their
two-handed swords with one hand.

When encountered, the Strength of the voadkyn must be deter-
mined by rolling percentile dice. The resulting number is the 18/
(roll) value for their strength. This gives them a +3 to +6 damage
bonus. They do not receive any attack roll bonus for Strength.
These giant-kin are usually in the company of 1d4 wood elves
(60%), 1d4 dire wolves (30%), or both (10%).

Wood giants are 90% resistant to sleep and charm spells; they
have infravision up to 90 feet.

The only magical skill yoadkyn have is the ability to poly-

 

 

 

 

 

morph into any humanoid figure, from three to 15 feet in height.
They cannot become a specific individual, only a typical speci-
men of that race. They have been known to use this ability to join
a party and trick it out of treasure.

Wood giants can move silently in a forest, despite their great
height, thus imposing a —4 penalty to opponents’ surprise rolls.
They can blend into forest vegetation, becoming effectively invis-
ible. Only creatures able to detect invisible objects can see them.
Although they are not invisible while attacking, they are ex-
tremely quick (Dexterity 16) and can move out of hiding, launch
an arrow, and move back into hiding in the same round. These
arrows seem to come from nowhere unless the target is looking at
the wood giants’ hiding spot.

Habitat/Society: Wood giants inhabit the same forests as wood
elves. They have no lairs, choosing to live under the stars or with
the wood elves for a time. Wood giants encountered in the forest
are mostly male (90%). Female wood giants usually remain at a
makeshift camp or with the wood elves at their lair. Offspring are
rare, as each female gives birth to only 1d4 children in her life-
time. The young are born and raised deep in the woods among the
wood elves, away from prying eyes.

The strong bond between wood elves and wood giants goes
back further than either race can remember. This may account for
the elven abilities of the giants. They do not mix or treat with any
other intelligent creatures, although they tolerate any good elf.
Like the elves, wood giants are fond of finely cut gems and well-
crafted magical items.

Humans who have had contact with wood giants describe them
as friendly enough, but flighty and frivolous, and never in a great
hurry to do anything other than eat and drink large amounts of
wine. Treants (with whom they occasionally converse) consider
them irrational, foolish, and occasionally obnoxious, but enjoy-
able company.

Ecology: The jaw of the voadkyn is large because of the over-
sized grinding teeth in it. These teeth are completely unsuited for
eating meat, but they are perfect for vegetables and other plants.
Wood giants can eat the leaves and roots of many plants that are
inedible to humans. They especially enjoy nuts and seeds.
Giant-kin, Spriggan

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any/Wilderness
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Pack
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average to exceptional (8-16)
TREASURE: A
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 3-12
ARMOR CLASS: 3 or 5 (10)
MOVEMENT: 9or15
HIT DICE: 4or8+4
THACO: 17 or 11
NO. OF ATTACKS: 2 .
DAMAGE/ATTACK: = 2-8/2-8 (weapon) +7 (Strength bonus)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spells, thief abilities
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil
SIZE: S (3' tall) or L (12' tall)
MORALE: Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: Male: 4,000

Female: 3,000

These ugly, dour cousins of gnomes are able to become giant-
sized at will.

In either size, sprizggans look basically the same. They are ugly,
thick-bodied humanoids, with pale or dull yellow skin, brown or
black hair, and red eyes. On rare occasions a spriggan may have
red hair, which they believe is a symbol of good luck. Their noses
are large and bulbous, but not beyond the human norm. They are
very fond of mustaches and bushy side burns, but they never
clean or comb them. This same policy of uncleanliness extends to
their bodies and any other possessions. Spriggans smell of dank
earth, stale sweat, and grime.

Outside of their lair they always wear armor and carry weap-
ons, usually polearms, although they have been known to carry
swords or maces. Spriggans never use shields. They like to carry
several nasty little daggers concealed in various places in their ar-
mor. Spriggans never wear jewelry or other ornaments. They pre-
fer to keep these things with their hoard, where they brood over
them at odd moments.

Combat: Spriggans are tricky and tough in battle. They have a
wide variety of options for combat. Their major ability is to
change from small to giant size at will. Weapons, armor and other
inanimate objects on their person shrink and grow with them.
This action takes the whole round, during which they can move
up to 30 feet but not fight. When small, spriggans can use the fol-
lowing spell-like effects: affect normal fires, shatter, and scare
(with a —2 penalty to the saving throw, due to their ugliness).
They can perform any one of these instead of fighting, once in
any round, as often as they want. When giant-sized, spriggans
cannot perform magic, other than to shrink again. In this form
they are as strong as hill giants (19).

In either size, they have 8th-level thief abilities like those of a
gnome with an 18 Dexterity. This high Dexterity enables them to
use a weapon twice each round. They can pick pockets (75%),
open locks (78%), find or remove traps (70%), move silently
(77%), hide in shadows (64%), hear noise (35%), climb walls
(81%), and read languages (40%). Keep in mind that their size
may affect these chances indirectly. For example, it is difficult for
a 12-foot-tall giant to hide in a six-foot-tall shadow. They can

 

 

 

 

 

backstab only while in small form, and they inflict triple damage
if successful.

Spriggans can never quite get organized as groups. In fact, they
are sometimes encountered with part of the group giant-sized and
part of them gnome-sized. On an individual level they are very
clever and use their abilities to the fullest to accomplish their
goals. These goals are usually to cause great havoc and mayhem
amongst other races. They seem to take great pleasure in destroy-
ing property and hurting innocent creatures.

HlabiiatSoececty: Spriggans usually travel in packs, all of them
male. The females keep to dismal burrows or secret dens in
forgotten ruins, rarely venturing out farther than necessary to
gather food. A female has the same combat abilities as a male ex-
cept that they have only 7 +4 Hit Dice in giant form. The females
mate with males from packs that wander nearby. The children are
cast out upon reaching maturity, the males to join up with packs
and the females to find a place to lair. Spriggan infant mortality is
high, with the males (80% ) surviving more often than the females
(60%).

Spriggans hate gnomes more than any living creatures, but
they truly love none but those of their own ilk. Perhaps it is the
similarity of the true gnomes to their race that drives their hatred.
They like to terrorize, rob, and otherwise work vile deeds. They
do not hesitate to attack or steal from traveling groups or small
settlements in their area. All of their possessions, including their
armor and weapons, are stolen from their victims. They greatly
fear large groups of organized humans and demihumans, and
they avoid such parties.

The roving packs of males tend to be meat eaters, pre-
ferring to hunt or steal their food. As such they must keep moving
and establish wide areas of control. The females tend to eat fruits
and grains that can be easily gathered near their dens. They eat
meat only when offered by a male as part of the mating ritual.

Spriggans are too mean and nasty to have any natural preda-
tors, although gnomes attack them on sight unless faced with
overwhelming odds. It usually takes a well-armed party to root
out a band of spriggans.

i Coley
Grell

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any/Subterranean or ruins

FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Carnivore
VTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)

TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 4

MOVEMENT: Fl 12 (D)

HIT DICE 5

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 11.

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4(x10)/1-6

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Paralyzation

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Immune to electricity

MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: M (5' diam.)

MORALE: Elite (13-14)

XP VALUE: 2,000

The grell is an underground-dwelling, levitating jellyfish. This
fearsome carnivore is feared for its ability to strike quickly before
any defense can be set up.

The body of a grell is basically spherical and about five feet in
diameter. It is clearly divided into two lobes, left and right. Its
drab olive colored flesh is streaked with white. Various lumps,
ridges, and veins give the appearance of an exposed brain, A ten-
inch-long beak protrudes from one side, just above the base and
directly on the major division of the lobes.

The base of the body is fringed with hundreds of one- to three-
inch-long tentacles. Ten six-foot-long tentacles trail from the bot-
tom of the body. Each pale green tentacle is as thick as a man’s
arm, and has many small spines along the inner surface.

The grell cannot talk, but it does emit bird-like squeaks and
squawks. It is completely silent in motion and when attacking. It
has a light, musky smell; its lair has a foul reek of stale carrion.

Combat: The grell has an average human intelligence, which it
uses to decide on strategy and tactics in combat. It will not attack
a party or individual that would obviously kill it.

Its most common strategy is to float up out of sight near a ceil-
ing and wait. It can move sideways at a movement rate of 4 by
waving its tentacles to create small air currents. If it can contact a
surface, the extra purchase grants it the full movement rate. It
rises or falls at its stated movement rate.

When a victim walks underneath it, the grell drops down si-
lently, usually with surprise (-3 penalty to opponent's surprise
roll). It attacks with all ten tentacles. Each tentacle that hits gets a
grip on the victim and remains anchored. For each hit, the victim
must roll a saving throw vs. paralysis, with a +4 bonus. If two or
more tentacles are gripping the victim, the grell can lift its prey
into the air (at half its normal movement rate). Once its prey is
paralyzed, the grell floats up out of sight to devour it. The grell
automatically hits paralyzed prey that is in its grasp without
needing an attack rol]. Captured prey lives for only a few rounds
once paralyzed and whisked up out of sight.

During combat rounds in which its victim is not paralyzed, it
will use a minimum of two tentacles to flay whomever is in its

 

 

 

 

 

grasp, and the remainder to flail at any other attackers. It can at-
tack with its beak, but only against paralyzed creatures in its
grasp. Remember that the grell is smart enough to make good de-
cisions about how to allocate its ten tentacles for combat.

Any hit on a tentacle will sever it, or at least render it unusable.
The tentacles are AC 4, just like the body. However, damage done
to the tentacles do not count against the creature's hit points. If
left alone, the grell can regenerate lost tentacles in one to two
days.

The grell is immune to electrical attacks, such as lightning.

Habitat/Society: The grell chooses to live in underground
realms or ruins. Its only known method of sight is by infravision,
so it prefers areas of perpetual darkness. It is subject to the whims
of strong air currents, so enclosed areas away from winds are
sought.

The grell is a solitary creature choosing to live apart from oth-
ers of its kind. The only time it is found with other grells is when
mating. It never bargains with other creatures willingly, but it is
smart enough to cut a deal if the alternative is death. The grell has
no interest in treasure or other trappings of humanoid civiliza-
tion. Its den is usually a cave or ledge well above the floor. Fre-
quently the grell sits just outside its den waiting for prey.

Ecology: The grell is a trapper/hunter and eats only freshly
killed prey, though just about any being is considered palatable. It
can sustain itself for weeks without a kill. It is particularly vulner-
able to attacks from above and behind. Its paralytic venom can-
not be extracted from the body because there is no sac in which it
is stored. A part of its flesh can be used as an ingredient for spells
and effects granting levitation or immunity to electricity.

Grells mate but once in their 30 to 40 year life span. The pair re-
mains together for only a couple of days, and then separate,
never to see each other again. A clutch of a half dozen or so eggs
are laid in a high, out-of-reach place and then abandoned by the
mother. The young start out as 1 Hit Die monsters and gain a Hit
Die every two months. They are born active and completely self-
sufficient.
Gremlin

 

  

   

 
      
  

 

 

re ee ee,

 

   

INS

      

SS SS SSS SS a i SS Se SS Se ae eee

 

Gremlin Fremlin Galltrit
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any/Land Any/Land Any/Non-arctic land
ORGANIZATION: Pack Pack Pack
ACTIVITY CYCLE; Night Day Night
DIET: Omnivore Herbivore Blood
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12) Average (8-10) Average (8-10)
TREASURE: QO, X x
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil Chaotic neutral Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1-6 1-4 1-4
ARMOR CLASS: 4 6 2
MOVEMENT: 6, Fl 18 (B) 3, Fl 12 (B) 3, Fl 18 (B)
HIT DICE: 4 3+6 ‘Zhit points
THACO: 17 17 20
NO. OF ATTACKS: 4 x 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4 1-4 1-2
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil Nil Blood drain
SPECIAL DEFENSES: +1 weapon +1 weapon Nil

needed to hit needed to hit
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 25 % Nil Nil
SIZE: T (18" tall) Tiny (1° tall) Tiny (6" tall)
MORALE: Unsteady (5-7) Unsteady (5-7) Average (8-10)
XP VALUE: 650 270 65

Often mistaken for imps, gremlins are small, winged goblinoids.
There are many varieties of gremlins, but they are all chaotic and
mischievous. Their skin color ranges from brown to black to
gray, frequently in a mottled combination. Their ears are very
large and pointed. A pair of bat-like wings enables them to Aly or
glide. Gremlins never wear clothing or ornamentation.

Combat: Gremlins are worthless in real combat. At any oppor-
tunity they flee rather than fight face to face. What gremlins like
to do best is cause trouble. The angrier their victims are, the hap-
pier the gremlins are. Their favorite tactic is to set up a trap to hu-
miliate an opponent and maybe even cause him to damage a
valued possession or hurt a loved one. If he gets hurt as well,
that’s just fine. For example, they might set a trip wire across a
doorway that pulls down a fragile vase onto the victim's head. A
building infested by a gremlin pack can be reduced to a shambles
in a single night. In melee, gremlins have only their weak bite.
They can fly quite well (MC: B), but they usually stay close to the
ground or well over their opponents’ heads, where they are diffi-
cult to fight. They can be hit only by magical weapons, and they
are 25% resistant to magic. Despite these defenses, they are cow-
ards and fight only if cornered.

Habitat/Society: Gremlins are magical creatures originally
from an unknown other plane of existence. They are highly sus-
ceptible to mutation and can interbreed with any goblinoid spe-
cies. This has resulted in several different gremlin races, each with
slightly different abilities and natures.

Gremlins travel in small packs, complete with a pecking order.
Each gremlin knows who is above him in the pecking order, and
who is below. Asa rule it is ordered by hit points, but an aggres-
sive gremlin with lower hit points may be above larger gremlins
in the pecking order. Males and females are indistinguishable to
all but other gremlins. Both sexes participate equally in all things.
Offspring are left to fend for themselves from birth, which they
are fully capable of doing. With a month, the gremlin is a fully
matured adult. Fortunately they don’t mate very often.

These obnoxious creatures usually look for a building or estate
to infest. Although they flee individual combat, they will not
leave the building or grounds they are infesting until it is no more
fun (everything is broken and the inhabitants have fled), or their
lives are in danger. Since the gremlins take great pains to not be |
seen, except as fleeting shadows, the inhabitants are frequently
convinced that the place is haunted.

Ecology: Gremlins are not a natural part of the ecology. Their
immunity to normal weapons protects them from normal preda-
tors. Unmolested, they live for centuries.

Fremlin

These friendly gremlins are quite harmless. They tend to be
plump, whiny, and lazy, but otherwise look like small, slate-
colored gremlins. Occasionally they become tolerable compan-
ions if they take a liking to someone and are well fed and
entertained. Even in this case, they never assist in combat and
may in fact hinder it by giving away the location of hiding charac-
ters or making other such blunders.

Galltrit

These nasty little stone-gray creatures live in areas of dung, car-
rion, or offal. Because of their small size and coloration, they are
detected only on a 1 in 8 chance (1 in 6 for elves). They attack
anything that disturbs them. They attempt to get surprise and
bite (with a +3 bonus to the attack roll if they have surprise)
somewhere unobtrusive. An anesthetic in their saliva prevents
their victims from feeling the bite, rather like a vampire bat. Once
locked on, galltrits suck 1 hit point of blood per round for a full
turn if undisturbed. If challenged in any way, the galltrits flee.
This loss of blood reduces the victim's Constitution by a point for
every four hit points of blood lost. If the victim loses three or
more points of Constitution, usually due to multiple galltrits, he
faints from the sudden blood loss. It takes two full turns to
awaken and two weeks to regain the lost Constitution points.
Grippli

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical/Swamps and jungles
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Tribal
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day
DIET, Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Very to high (11-14)
TREASURE; © Qx4, 1 _
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1-10
ARMOR CLASS: 9
MOVEMENT: 9, leap 15
HIT DICE: 1+1
THACO: 19
NO. OF ATTACKS: i
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4 (weapon)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: —3 penalty to opponents’ surprise
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil
SIZE: S (23/2' tall)
MORALE: Average (8-10)
XP VALUE: Normal: 65

Tribe mother: 270

Mates: 175

Grippli resemble small, intelligent, humanoid tree frogs. They are
have a primitive culture and are nonaggressive.

They stand two-and-a-half feet tall and weigh 25 to 30 pounds.
Their bodies are shaped like those of frogs, except for the human-
like hands and hand-like feet. Their eyes are yellow with vertical
slit pupils. Their skin is gray-green with camouflage stripes and
swirling patterns. Although their skin looks wet and shiny, it is
actually dry to the touch, Grippli smell of old, wet vegetation.

They love bright colors and eagerly acquire any such items.
They wear clothing only for decoration or for a particular func-
tional purpose, such as for pockets. A normal encounter with
grippli outside of the village finds them wearing only thin belts or
loin cloths to hold weapons or acquired items.

They speak a language of croaks, groans, clicks, and squeaks.
In a tribe there is usually at least one member that can speak ei-
ther common, elvish, or some other jungle humanoids’ lan-
guage. When speaking any language but their own, they are
barely understandable because of the croaking resonances in
their speech.

Combat: Because of the grippli’s coloring, opponents suffer a
—3 penalty to their surprise rolls. Grippli defend themselves with
snares, nets, poisoned darts, and the occasional sword or dagger.
Any metal weapons must be manufactured elsewhere for the grip-
pli, so swords are rare. They can adapt to use any weapons, and
they have been known to use spears and blowguns on rare occa-
sions. They never wear armor, Generally speaking the grippli
prefer small weapons that don’t get in the way of climbing.

A grippli can climb trees or non-sheer rock at its normal move-
ment rate, thanks to its unusual hands and feet. When keeping
still among vegetation, a grippli’s natural camouflage causes a —3
penalty to its opponents’ surprise rolls. They have infravision
good up to 10 yards, which means they can operate at night al-
most as well as during the day.

They are very capable of formulating strategies and tactics to
overcome a larger, more powerful force. Grippli prefer ambushes
and traps to most other strategies. By trapping their opponents in
snares and nets, they can hurl darts at them safely from high in

 

 

 

 

 

the trees. If unprovoked, they attack only to steal various
brightly colored baubles.

Habitat/Society: A grippli tribal village is made of small huts of
wood and mud built on the ground, in the deep shadows of large
trees. On rare occasions, a grippli village is found in the strong
limbs of the trees. Each village is led by a tribe mother (AC 7, HD
3, 1d6+1 points of damage with a weapon). Once per day the
tribe mother can emit a musk cloud, which is treated as a stinking
cloud spell. She looks like any other grippli, except for being al-
most four feet tall, She has 1d3 mates of larger than normal size
(AC 8, HD 2, 1d4+1 points of damage with poisoned weapons),
standing three to three-and-a-half feet tall. The tribe mother is
supposed to have a touch of the blood of their god in her.

A typical village has 5d6 males capable of defending it. There
are an equal number of noncombatant females and 1d6 offspring,
also noncombatants. They have basic family units, just like hu-
mans, and each family has its own hut. The tribe mother’s hut
doubles as a temple to their small, frog-like deity. Other deities in
the pantheon include evil snake gods and spider goddesses.

Their natural high intelligence enables them to learn new de-
vices and weapons quickly and easily. As a race they have no de-
sire to manufacture such items themselves. However, they will
trade for them with other races. Trade items usually include rare
fruits or other hard-to-get jungle specimens. They are extremely
cautious and only develop trade relations with groups that they
trust completely, such as good elves or the rare village of good hu-
mans in their area.

Ecology: Grippli’s eat fruit and insects. They trap small insects
in large quantities and hunt the giant varieties like humans hunt
stags. They are in turn hunted by most large, ground- and tree-
based predators. Giant snakes and spiders in particular are fond
of grippli as meals.

Grippli are rare in the world, mostly because of their low birth-
rate. They live to be 700 years old, but give birth to only six or so
young in that time. Because of this, the grippli defend their young
ferociously.
Grung

 

     

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical and subtropical/Swamps
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Tribal

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: Ge

ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil

NO. APPEARING: 4-48

ARMOR CLASS: 7

MOVEMENT: 9, Sw 12

HIT DICE: 1+2

THACO: 19

NO, OF ATTACKS: 2

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-3 (bite)/1-6 (weapon)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Poison

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: S (3' tall)

MORALE: Elite (13)

XP VALUE: Normal: 120
Tadpole: 7

Juvenile: 35
Shaman, Ist or 2nd: 175
Shaman, 3rd: 270

Grung are highly territorial, toad-like humanoids that dwell in
swamps and marshes.

Standing about three feet tall, grung have lower bodies that
strongly resemble those of giant frogs or toads, with powerful
legs and large webbed feet. Their upper bodies, however, are
more developed, with muscular forelimbs, opposable thumbs,
and smaller, more humanoid looking heads. They stand upright
and move in rapid, short hops. They are incapable of the prodi-
gious leaps and jumps of frogs, toads, or bullywugs.

While evolution has given them intelligence and forelimbs ca-
pable of using tools, it has taken away the prehensile tongues of
frogs. In its place, the grung’s wide mouths are full of the sharp
teeth needed by carnivores. Grung have the slick, wet skin of
other amphibians. Since they breathe through their skin, they
must keep it moist. Their coloration is like that of bullfrogs—
dappled green and brown on their backs, shading to white or yel-
low on their bellies. Their eyes—smaller than those of frogs and
toads and protected by bony ridges—are red with black pupils.
Males are slightly smaller than females,

Combat: Because they're small, grung prefer ambush to frontal
assaults. Their favorite tactic is to lie concealed until their
enemies—whether travelers or a party of grung from another
tribe—have wandered well into range, then open fire with short
bows and spears. These attacks are particularly deadly against
non-grung, because the creatures invariably poison their arrow-
heads and spear tips. This poison is the sticky fluid constantly se-
creted by the grung’s skin. Before using a weapon, the grung wipe
the tip on their skin to rub on the poison. The poison is highly
toxic; those who fail the saving throw die in four rounds (no dam-
age if the saving throw is successful). The grung are immune to
this particular type of poison (but not to other poisons). The poi-
son breaks down within ten rounds when exposed to air.

Although they prefer to use their bows and spears, grung can
deliver a nasty bite. Their saliva contains a weakened form of the
same poison their skin secretes. The victim receives a +2 bonus
to his saving throw, but he dies in six rounds if the saving throw
fails.

Grung die if their skin dries out. They must immerse them-

 

i 4 : i (] L
(eae

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

selves in water at least once every three hours for a Full round or
they suffocate.

Habitat/Society: Grung are war-like, territorial creatures. They
typically claim all territory within at least a mile of their tribal
settlements. Anyone unwise enough to enter this territory is a tar-
get for immediate attack. Grung from other tribes are also fair
game; nasty little border wars between neighboring tribes are the
rule, not the exception, Most encounters with grung are with
wandering war bands looking for trespassers. Grung are always
hostile and cannot be negotiated with.

Grung settlements are untidy collections of crude shelters,
sometimes concealed inside large dead trees. Tribes number 10d6
+ 40 individuals, with young comprising 25% of that number
(AC 10, Sw 12, HD 1/2, #AT 1, Dmg 1 [no poison], SA nil). Grung
lay eggs, and their offspring go through a tadpole stage. For this
reason, grung settlements are always next to open water. Within
three months of hatching, the tadpoles absorb their tails, develop
limbs, and climb out of the water and join the tribe as immature
grung. These young grungs have 1-1 Hit Dice but otherwise have
the same abilities as adults. They reach full maturity in another
six months,

Grung tribes are matriarchal. War chiefs are all female, and the
tribal chieftain is the strongest fighter among the war chiefs. Ris-
ing through the ranks is by duels to the death, with the victor get-
ting the title. Each tribe also has a single female shaman of up to
3rd level. Her spheres are All, Animal, Combat, Healing (re-
versed spells only), and Plant.

Ecology: Grung eat swamp-dwelling mammals, such as rats,
unwary travelers, even other grung. They have few natural pred-
ators due to the toxicity of their flesh. Giant poisonous snakes are
usually immune to grung poison and actively hunt grung.

The water around grung settlements is tainted by their poison-
ous secretions. Any non-grung drinking the water must roll a suc-
cessful saving throw vs. poison (with a +3 bonus) or become
nauseated for 2d4 rounds. Nauseated creatures fight with penal-
ties of —1 to their attack rolls and +1 to their Armor Class.

Grung poison is almost impossible to bottle (as any exposure to
air causes it to decompose in ten rounds).
Hobgoblin, Norker

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: — Any/Non-arctic
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Tribal

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore _
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: E

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil

NO. APPEARING: 3-30

ARMOR CLASS: 3

MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 1+2

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: cz
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6 (weapon)/1-3 (bite)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: __ Nil

SIZE: 5 (4’ tall)

MORALE: Steady (11-12)

XP VALUE: Normal: 35
Sub-chief: 65
Chief: 120

Distant relatives of hobgoblins, norkers are nasty little human-
oids with a war-like disposition. They are intelligent and aggres-
sive,

Norkers are small, wiry humanoids. Their skin is any shade
from reddish brown to dark gray. Unlike their hobgoblin cousins,
they have no hair, just tough, leathery skin. Their faces are a
brighter shade of their skin color. The males have brightly col-
ored blue or red noses. Norkers’ eyes are yellow, as are their
teeth. These are easy to see, because the two canines protrude
three inches down from their upper lips. It should come as no sur-
prise that they have foul-smelling breath. As you would expect,
their bodies are equally odorous, smelling of stale sweat and
years of avoiding any liquid with soap in it.

Armor is not worn by norkers, because their skin is as tough as
most armor. For clothing they wear only loin cloths or other hip
gear. Trophies and other adornments are hung from the belt.
Norkers like red and blue over other colors.

Norkers do not have their own language, but speak a dialect of
hobgoblin that is difficult, but not impossible, for even hobgob-
lins to understand. They also can speak with orcs, goblins, and
such. Their voices are low and gravelly.

on oo0 Atypical force of norkers is armed with clubs or other
bludgeoning weapon. They don't use shields or armor, When at-
tacking, norkers swing their weapons and then bite with their
fangs. Disarmed norkers have no effective claw or fist attack.
A band of norkers attacks using swarming tactics. They swing
with their weapons and then leap in to sink their fangs into their
victims. From there they cling if possible and keep on swinging and
biting, eventually dragging their prey down by sheer numbers.

tlabitat/So A tribe of norkers is a disorganized bunch of
thugs. The strongest member rules, but only within the immedi-
ate reach of his arm.

 

 

 

 

 

A typical tribe of norkers has 2d10x10 adult male warriors. In
addition, for every 20 warriors there is a leader norker of maxi-
mum hit points (10) that dominates them. Any tribe with over
100 warriors has a sub-chief of 3 Hit Dice and an AC of 1. Back in
the lair there is a chief, who has 4 Hit Dice and an AC of 0. He
usually has 2d4 sub-chief bodyguards and 3d4 leader bady-
guards, In addition to the warriors in the tribe, there are 150% as
many females and three times as many young as warriors.

Most (80%) norker lairs are underground or deep in old ruins.
The rest are surface villages, usually taken by conquest and then
fortified if necessary. Norkers cannot cooperate long enough to
build more than a large fence around the village with a walkway
at the top and a gate. While sunlight is not harmful to norkers,
they dislike it and are most active after the sun goes down. These
villages tend to stink, because the norkers do not understand san-
itation.

Norkers negotiate with strong parties, but always look for
some way to double-cross. At best they are unreliable allies. Dif-
ferent tribes of norkers rarely meet each other, but when they do
it is constant guerrilla warfare between them. Each side kills the
individuals of the other whenever it can, keeping the fangs for
trophies. However, they always stop short of all-out warfare.

Powerful, well-equipped bands of hobgoblins can command
the dubious loyalty of a norker tribe for a while, as the norkers re-
spect and fear their larger cousins.

Ecology: Norkers eat anything that moves or bleeds. If desper-
ate, they can survive on grains or other edible plants. They dislike
working to get their next meal and steal rather than hunt if possi-
ble. Norkers are hunted by the larger predators in their area. The
hide is tough to get through, but the flesh is edible.
Hook Horror

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any/ Subterranean
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Clan
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: EP
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO, APPEARING: 2-12
ARMOR CLASS: 3
MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 5

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-8/1-8/2-12
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: L (9’ tall)
MORALE: Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 175

The heok horror is a bipedal, underground-dwelling monster
that looks like a cross between a vulture and a man with hooks in-
stead of hands.

The hook horror stands about nine feet tall and weighs almost
350 pounds. It has a tough, mottled grey exoskeleton, like that of
an insect. Its front limbs end in 12-inch-long hooks. Its legs end in
feet that have three small hooks, like long, sharp toes. Its head is
shaped like that of a vulture, including the hooked beak. Its eyes
are multifaceted. It is thought that the hook horror is distantly re-
lated to the cockroach or cave cricket.

Hook horrors do not have a smell to humans and demihumans,
but an animal would detect a dry musty odor. They communicate
in a series of clicks and clacks made by the exoskeleton at their
throats. In a cave, this eerie sound can echo a long way. They can
use this to estimate cavern sizes and distances, much like the sonic
radar of a bat.

Combat: Hook horrors have acute hearing and are surprised
only ona roll of 1, They always know their territory, and they try
to ambush unsuspecting travelers or denizens. Each round they
swing with both hooks. If in any round both hit, during that
round their beaks hit automatically. They automatically inflict
2d6 points of damage each round with the beak until at least one
of the hooks is dislodged.

The eyesight of the hook horrors is very poor. They are blinded
in normal light. They use their extremely acute hearing to track
and locate prey. Since their eyesight is so poor anyway, they suf-
fer no combat or movement penalties if blinded or in complete
darkness. They attack silenced opponents with the penalties oth-
ers suffer when attacking blind.

Hook horrors are natural climbers, as their hooks give them ex-
cellent purchase on rock surfaces. They can move at normal
speed up vertical surfaces that are not sheer. Their great weight
means that they cannot hang from the ceiling like other insects.

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: The obvious penalty for having hooks instead
of hands is that hook horrors cannot use weapons or tools, They
can only pick up items in their beaks. This severely restricts their
ability to amass large treasures.

A clan of hook horrors most often lives in caves and under-
ground warrens. The entrance is usually up a vertical or steeply
sloped rock wall. Each family unit in the clan has its own small
cavern off a central cave area. The clan's eggs are kept in the
safest, most defensible place. The clan is ruled by the eldest fe-
male, who never participates in combat. The eldest male, fre-
quently the mate of the clan ruler, takes charge of all hunting or
other combat situations and is considered the war chieftain.

Members of a clan rarely fight each other. They may quarrel or
not cooperate, but they rarely come to blows. Clans sometimes
fight each other, but only when there is a bone of contention, such
as territorial disputes. It is rare for a clan of hook horrors to want
to rule large areas or to conquer other clans.

Hook horrors have poor relationships with other races. Al-
though they do not foolishly attack strong parties, generally
other creatures are considered to be meat. They retreat when
faced with a stronger group. Hook horrors do not recognize in-
debtedness or gratitude. Their simple language does not even
have a term for these concepts. Just because a player character
saves the life of a hook horror does not mean that it will feel grate-
ful and return the favor.

Ecology: Although hook horrors are basically omnivores, they
prefer meat. They can eat just about any cave-dwelling fungus,
plants, lichens, or animals. Hook horrors are well acclimated to
cave life. They have few natural predators, although anything
that managed to catch one would try to eat it.

The hook horror’'s exoskeleton dries and becomes too brittle for
use after a month or so.
Horgar

 

 

 

 

r

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any/Subterranean
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Rocks or earth
INTELLIGENCE: Semi (5-7)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: —10 (head is AC 0)
MOVEMENT: 3

HIT DICE: 30 to 100
THACO: 5

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 20-80

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Squirt acid
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Intense heat
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: G (30'-100' long)
MORALE: Fearless (19-20)
XP VALUE; 30 HD: 26,000

(add 1,000/HD above 30)

This immense and powerful creature eats its way through solid
rock, creating tunnels, passageways, and caverns in its wake,
When not in motion, a horgar resembles a lava formation. In mo-
tion it looks like a giant, black rock slug. It is an oblong lump
with a thick skin of true stone (five feet thick in an adult). Great
cracks in the skin divide it into large plates that shift and slide
when the horgar is moving. The only exposed part is the head, lo-
cated at one end of the oblong, which is just a lump of softer-
looking stone.

The horgar smells like the super-heated acid that it secretes
from between its rock plates, somewhat like ammonia. These
gases make other creatures’ eyes water and irritate their mouths
and nasal passages. The only sounds it makes are the grinding of
its skin against the tunnel walls and the hiss of acid and heat melt-
ing rock.

Combat: The horgar is not an aggressive creature. The main
problem is that it does not recognize most living creatures at all. If
unprovoked, it goes its own way, whether or not somebody is in
the way. If attacked, it tries to leave. The tunnels it leaves behind
are dangerously hot for the first three hours, causing 2d10 points
of damage if touched by bare flesh. Wood or paper that comes in
contact with a hot wall ignite instantly; metal that is in contact
with the wall for one turn can cause 2d10 points of burn damage.
The walls are still hot, but not dangerous, for a full 24 hours after
the horgar passes. The tunnel is also littered with pools of acid,
which cause 1d4x10 points of damage to bare flesh. Other objects
must roll successful saving throws vs. acid or be destroyed.

This creature is immune to acid, fire, and electrical attacks.
Striking it with physical weapons is like hitting a granite boulder.
Edged weapons cause only half damage and must roll saving
throws vs. crushing blow. All weapons must roll saving throws
vs. acid, which means edged weapons must roll two saving
throws for each hit. Failure of either saving throw means the
weapon is destroyed, either shattered or dissolved.

If the horgar can't run away from attackers, it turns and fights.
Its only weapon is to squirt acid from its head up to 20 feet away.
At the first opportunity, it again tries to ee. Horgar are so hard
to hurt, and so dangerous, that most creatures just leave them
alone.

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Horgar live in the deep, hard-rock regions of
the earth. On rare occasions they can be found closer to the sur-
face or in softer rock. They do not have any society of their own,
but they have affected many other societies, The name horgar is
dwarvish, while the gnomes call them storgin; both names trans-
late loosely to stone-eater.

For all the ages that the horgar have been tunneling in the
Underdark, thousands of miles of tunnels and caverns are left be-
hind. Other natural conditions, such as running water, have
eroded most of them, giving them a natural look. These caverns
have become homes to many races.

Some of the more primitive races of the Underdark worship the
horgar as gods. Others, such as the dwarves, duergar, drow,
gnomes, and the deep gnomes use them as work beasts. The
horgar are kept in reinforced, glass-lined pits. They can be driven
by slipping thin, glass-sheathed spears between the plates of their
skin. This causes no damage, but irritates them sufficiently to
make them move away from that side, The handler, called
horgarin in dwarvish, must be skilled and quick to avoid having
his spear snapped by the sliding plates of the skin. The dwarves
have a saying, “as unlucky as a horgarin without a spear.”

Every 500 years, a horgar splits off 2d10 smal! parts of itself in a
deep, hidden cave with only a single entrance. Each egg that is
laid subtracts 1 Hit Die from the horgar. They radiate heat and
slowly ooze acid. In the next two years the eggs mature into 30-
Hit Die infants and become active, hungry, and mobile. After that
they grow 1 Hit Die per year until they reach adulthood at 100 Hit
Dice. Horgar are roughly one foot long for each Hit Die.

Ecology: The horgar are vital to the ecology of the Underdark.
The byproducts of the stone-eaters are breathable gases, acids
and other fluids, and various mineral deposits. Without the tun-
neling horgar, life would not be possible in the Underdark. The
bodies of the horgar provides nothing of value, except to
wizards—some parts of it are used for spells involving earth,
stone, digging, and molten heat.
Hound, Yeth

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any/Land
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Pack
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night
DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: 4-16
ARMOR CLASS: 0
MOVEMENT: 15, Fl 27 (B)
HIT DICE: 3+3
THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-8
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Fear

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Silver or magical weapons to hit
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 10%

SIZE: M (41/2'-5' tall)

MORALE: Fearless (19-20)

XP VALUE: 3,000

These fearsome flying hounds are magical creatures of the night.
They hunt all manner of humans, demihumans, and faerie folk.

Standing about five feet at the shoulder, yeth hounds weigh
around 400 pounds. Their short fur is dull, nonreflective black. In
the dark all that can be seen is the cherry red glow of their eyes.
Their heads are almost human—flat with protruding noses in-
stead of muzzles. Their short pointed ears are held curving up and
away from the head, making them look like short horns.

They give off an odor like smoke on a chilly night. Since they
can fly, yeth hounds make no noise when moving. However, their
ghastly how! can chill a man’s blood up to a mile away. These un-
natural creatures are frequently in the company of evil huntsmen
or other powerful evil forces.

Combat: The worst thing about a yeth hound pack is the bay-
ing. It can be heard up to a mile away. Those within 90 feet must
roll successful saving throws vs. spell or flee in panic, usually to
be pulled down and shredded by the ferocious pack. Only one
saving throw per creature per encounter is allowed. If it fails, the
character panics until he can no longer hear the baying. If it suc-
ceeds, he can withstand the baying for the remainder of that
encounter.

The yeth hound is immune to all physical weapons except sil-
ver or magical ones. Silver weapons inflict 1 point of damage per
hit. Magical weapons cause damage equal to their bonus. For ex-
ample, a sword +2 would inflict 2 points of damage on a hit.
Magical weapons that do not have a bonus cause 1 point of dam-
age per hit.

While yeth hounds are smarter than the average dog, their tac-
tics in combat are very similar to those of most pack hunters.
They run their prey until it is too tired to fight. Then the pack cor-
ners or surrounds the victims before all rushing in at once to finish
them off. They have no claw attack, only a bite. If under the con-
trol of a huntsman, he may direct their strategy or tactics.

Being unnatural creatures of the night, yeth hounds cannot
stand the light of day. If sunrise is imminent they retreat to seek
their dens. They always do this with enough time to make it

 

 

 

 

 

safely back. No amount of coercion by any huntsman, even a de-
ity, can change this. They are unaffected by torchlight or light
spells, but artificial sunlight will make them flee in panic. If fore-
ibly exposed to natural sunlight, they fade away in one round, to
roam the Ethereal plane forever. If killed on the Ethereal plane,
they are permanently dead.

Habitat/Society: Yeth hounds are created by evil forces from the
lower planes and given to loyal servants. If the servants are de-
stroyed, sometimes the hounds are left to fend for themselves.
These pack animals have better than animal intelligence and al-
ways seek to align themselves with powerful evil masters. Such
things as night hags, vampires, evil wizards, etc., can commanda
pack of yeth hounds. Of course such a master must be immune to
the fearful baying of the creatures and have some method, usu-
ally telepathy, of communicating with them. They can be made to
understand speech by spells, but they cannot talk under any cir-
cumstances.

Within the pack, the hound with the most hit points leads the
rest. There are no questions or quarrels, just instant cooperation
and obedience. They do not seek to help one another, and they
cannot be swayed by threats or promises of great reward. The
only pleasure they have is listening to the panicked cry of their
prey just before it is pulled down.

The pack lairs in a subterranean den until the sun is completely
down and night has fallen. No amount of persuasion will get
them to leave their den during daylight. They generally sleep or
pace during the daylight hours. These dens are always in very re-
mote and wild places, away from civilization.

Ecology: They are not part of nature, nor do they contribute
greatly to the ecology. Yeth hounds do need to eat to survive, but
only once every cycle of the moon. They devour any warm-
blooded prey, but vastly prefer demihumans, brownies, and the
like. No natural animal hunts a yeth hound, and many unnatural
creatures avoid them as well.
Iguana, Giant

 

     
   
 

  

 

eee

ibatinvchass

   

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: _— Temperate and subtropical/ Forests
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Animal (1)
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1 or 2-12
ARMOR CLASS: 6

MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 6+2

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 bite
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-8

SPECIAL ATTACKS; Swallows whole

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: L (8’-10' long)
MORALE: Average (8-10)
XP VALUE: 420

The giant iguana is a large, omnivorous reptile found in wilder-
ness forests.

This large lizard looks just like a normal iguana, except that it is
eight to ten feet long in the body with a long, thin tail ten to 15
feet long. It is green and black in color, and more or less spotted
and barred. The neck and back bear a high, serrated crest, and
there is a large sac under its chin. The long-toed feet have strong
talons, which are used for climbing and running but not combat.

Combat: The giant iguana attacks only if cornered or hungry. It
can stand in any position unmoving for great lengths of time.
Even its breathing is not noticeable. Its coloration provides cam-
ouflage in darkened undergrowth, where it causes a —3 penalty
to opponents’ surprise rolls. Any attacks to its tail cause pain, but
inflict no damage on the lizard. The tail can even be severed clean
off, This is unpleasant for the iguana, but it grows a new one at
the rate of a foot a month.

The lizard’'s wide mouth inflicts only 2d4 points of damage be-
cause it has only a few teeth. On a natural roll of 20 it can swallow
any man-sized creature whole. A 19 or 20 enables it to swallow
any smaller sized creature, such as a dwarf or halfling. The
iguana always goes for the smallest creature in a group. Once a
meal is swallowed, it turns and runs away. It can swallow only
one creature per week, unless they are small animals.

Any creature swallowed has to get out before it suffocates (for
a character this is a number of rounds equal to 1/a Constitution,
rounded up). The stomach lining is the same Armor Class as the
outer skin, but only small motions can be made in such tight
quarters. Any edged or pointed weapon under a foot in length
can be used normally; the attack roll is used to determine if the
arm can be moved to attack. Blunt weapons are useless and all
other weapons cause only 1 point of damage per successful at-
tack.

Habitat/Society: Giant iguanas are solitary hunters, but they
gather in groups for sunning or to find a mate. Such groups are
rarely dangerous, and there is only a 1 in 6 chance of an unpro-
voked attack. They prefer to hunt in the darkened undergrowth
of a forest and then bask in the sun to digest. Even standing in the
open under bright sunlight, it is possible to not notice the com-

 

 

 

 

 

pletely immobile iguana.

Unlike their smaller, herbivorous cousins, giant iguanas eat
both meat and plants. They prefer insects to mammals, although
they hunt both, and prefer grasses to bushes or tree leaves. They
do not need to eat very often, only once every other day.

The giant iguana can climb any slope up to 60 degrees that has
reasonable grip at normal speed. It can even climb large trees if
necessary. Unlike the smaller variety, the giant iguana cannot
leap.

Ecology: Iguana meat is tender and tasty to most humanoid
creatures. Some plainsmen even keep small herds, although they
are much more trouble than placid cows and sheep. Fences and
even rock walls are not much of an obstacle to them, and they are
much more dangerous than cows.

The giant iguana can rarely be domesticated, or used as a pack
animal. However, an ingundi (see next page) can ride them with
little trouble. The ingundi do not use a saddle; they just push the
spines of the iguana’s back flat and sit on them. This would be un-
comfortable to anything with a tender hide.

Horned Iguana

The giant horned iguana is just like the regular giant iguana, ex-
cept for the three two-foot-long horns on its head. It does not at-
tack with these horns, but it can move them to intercept a rush or
charge. Interception requires a successful attack roll; the horns
cause 3d6 points of damage to the charging enemy. This occurs
just before the attack, even if the horned iguana loses the initia-
tive roll. If it attempts to intercept the charge, that is its only at-
tack that round.

Other Species

There are many different species of giant iguana. They may look
quite different, but all have basically the same statistics. They
have different coloration, smaller tails, independently moving
eyes, different numbers of toes on the foot, etc. Despite these dif-
ferences, they still have the same Hit Dice, Armor Class, THACO,
etc,
Ingundi

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate /Forests
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: D
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 6
MOVEMENT: 6

HIT DICE: 3+2
THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2 claws, 1 bite
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6/1-6/1-12
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spells

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (5'-6’ tall)
MORALE: Average (10)
XP VALUE: 420

The ingundi is an intelligent humanoid reptile that can cloak itself
in illusion to fool its prey.

In its true form, the ingundi is similar in appearance to a small
lizard man—a lightly built, bipedal reptile standing five to six feet
tall, with a tail that balances its upper body. Its mouth is wider
than a lizard man’s, however, and is filled with sharp, rending
teeth. Its forelimbs, though slimmer and weaker, bear long and
hideously sharp claws. Ingundi skin color ranges from a light
green on the back to a pale yellow on the creature's belly. Its small
eyes are yellow with large black pupils. The ingundi wears no
clothes or ornaments of any kind.

Ingundi have no language, but they communicate telepathi-
cally.

Combat: The ingundi rarely appears in its true form. It has a
powerful form of ESP, a well-developed change self power, and
typically appears as some other, more innocuous, creature. It can
be any creature from the size of a large dog to that of a bear. It can
disguise itself this way twice a day; the disguise lasts for 1d10 +10
rounds,

When hunting humans or demihumans, it takes on the appear-
ance of an attractive individual of the same race as its victim but
of the opposite sex. The physical details of the illusion are picked
right out of the mind of its prey. It always picks out a figure
greatly desired, but frequently unattainable, by the victim. The
ESP power can be blocked by magical spells, such as mind blank.
With intelligent creatures there is always the danger of appearing
as somebody who would not reasonably be there.

In this form, the ingundi approaches its victim and tries to en-
gage him or her in flirtatious conversation. In the case of animal
prey it uses courtship rituals. Unknown to the victim, the ingun-
di's side of the conversation is all telepathic. Anybody else wit-
nessing the two hears only a one-sided conversation.

During the talk the ingundi casts a powerful, telepathic charm
person or monster (as the case may be) spell. The victim gets a
saving throw vs. spell with a —2 penalty. If the ESP ability cannot

 

 

 

 

 

read the victim's mind, the ingundi cannot charm him. If it is suc-
cessful, the ingundi leads the victim away from prying eyes,
where it convinces its victim to remove all armor. During the first
round, it attacks with a +4 bonus to its attack roll and automatic
surprise. After this initial round, the charm is dispelled, the bonus
is lost, and its victim can strike back. If anything goes wrong,
such as a failed charm or somebody intervening, it flees. It fights
only if cornered.

Habitat/Society: An ingundi typically makes a small lair inside
a dead tree or among exposed tree roots, Individuals approach
each other only to mate, once a year during the depths of winter.
The single egg the female lays is hidden and forgotten. Twelve
weeks later it hatches. The newly hatched ingundi has full
powers, but it hunts only small animals until it is full grown six
months later.

The normal prey for ingundi are forest animals of a size that it
can imitate through illusion, such as deer. It is not afraid of hu-
mans and hunts them if they are the nearest prey. It usually hunts
only once every few days, a single kill being enough to feed it for
that long.

Ingundi have no known culture or civilization.

Ecology: The ingundi is a highly efficient predator. It has no
natural enemies. Its magical abilities are used defensively, the ESP
warning it of stalkers. When one is detected, it merely changes
into a creature that the hunter would not hunt, or even into a sim-
ilar creature of the opposite sex. In this case the hunted becomes
the hunter.

The ingundi produces nothing of value for humans or animals.
Some ingundi take giant iguanas, charm them, and use them as
mounts. They are controlled telepathically and obey their rider
completely. Ingundi are believed to be responsible for many
myths and legends about evil creatures that hunt wicked people.
This is a common rationale when folk disappear without a trace
and no natural cause can be found.
Kech

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN;: Tropical to subarctic/Forests
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Band
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: B
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: 2-8

ARMOR CLASS: 4
MOVEMENT: 15 (6 climbing)
HIT DICE: 5

THACO: 15

NO, OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-5/2-5/1-6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Camouflage
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE; M (6' tall)
MORALE: Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 650

Kech are forest fiends that prey on humans and demihumans.

A kech is monkey-like in gait and appearance, with a fang-
filled mouth, protruding lower jaw, and fiery blue eyes. The
frame is slim and finely muscled. Kech are equally at home in
trees or on the ground. Their toes are long and prehensile, ena-
bling them to grasp limbs and swing from branch to branch. In
trees kech move 60 feet per round. On the ground, kech run like
baboons, using their knuckles and back legs to spring after oppo-
nents. Their skin is tough and leathery, with leaf-like wrinkles
and a natural green camouflage coloring. Kech have average in-
telligence but are cunning and crafty. They speak their own lan-
guage, common, and a smattering of local tongues.

Combat: Kech are wily hunters. They move through forests
with a 50% chance of absolute silence. This, combined with their
natural coloring, imposes a —5 penalty to opponents’ surprise
rolls.

They prefer traps to outright attacks, constructing pit falls,
snares, and so forth, to catch unwary travelers or weaken large
parties of adventurers. Kech speak common clearly and some-
times fake cries for help to attract their victims. In melee, kech de-
liver a vicious bite while raking and tearing with their two front
claws.

Kech respect but do not fear humans and demihumans. They
prefer lone targets but will attack a large, well-armed party at
night. During combat, kech usually concentrate on one or two
members of the party (most likely the guards), trying to dispatch
them quickly before the others awaken. The kech then disappear
into the forest dragging their kill with them.

Kech pass through the forest almost without a trace. There is
only a 50% chance, at best, of a ranger being able to follow a
fresh kech trail (-25% per hour).

Habitat/Society: Kech bands roam all woodlands from tropical
rain forests to subarctic pines. A band contains 2d4 adults and
1d3 young (noncombatants).

Kech prey on human and demihuman forest settlements, which
they find by tracing trails and paths back to their sources. When a

 

 

B84

 

 

 

kech band finds a village, they immediately build a tree nest three
to five miles away. At night, kech adults leave the nest, prowling
along the trails leading into the village, and setting up snares.
Their victims are usually lorie workers, wandering elderly, or
young couples out on late-night strolls.

Kech hunt an area until they make four or five kills, then move
on before armed resistance develops. The kech band follows one
of the roads leading from the settlement in hopes that it leads to
another village.

Young kech cling to the backs their elders while traveling. At
night, when the adults hunt, the young stay hidden in carefully
camouflaged tree nests. Tree nests are 90% invisible from the
ground, so kech rarely leave a guardian behind.

Most kech bands live evil lives. These beasts kill and maim de-
liberately, terrorizing nearby settlements and tormenting their
victims for pleasure before killing them. Occasionally several evil
bands join together to rampage through a settlement. These at-
tacks always occur on cloudy or moonless nights. Rampaging
bands show no mercy and sometimes slay entire villages.

A few kech bands (10%) may be neutral instead of evil.

Ecology: Neutral kech prey on humans, elves, and half-elves. If
starvation is imminent they'll also eat orcs. Evil kech eat all of the
above along with monkeys, gorillas, carnivorous apes, and other
kech.

Kech bands keep their numbers small, to match the food source
in the area. A band that grows too large will split into two smaller
units.

Kech are not deliberately hunted by any carnivore because
they are too elusive to provide a steady food source. 5till, hu-
mans and demihumans sometimes kill kech for their leathery
skin. The skin of a kech, when carefully tanned, makes an espe-
cially thick and durable set of leather armor (treat as AC 7).

Kech keep no treasure, but their nests sometimes contain items
from previous victims. They live 40 years on average.
Kyuss, Son of

 

      

(EG

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any/Usually subterranean or ruins
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Group

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Living bei
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)

TREASURE: One in group Q; others nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil

NO. APPEARING: 1-3

ARMOR CLASS: 10

MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE; 4

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-8

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Regeneration & see below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (5'-6' tall)

MORALE: Special

XP VALUE: 1,400

Sons of Kyuss are horrible undead beings that convert living hu-
mans and demihumans into cursed undead like themselves. Sons
look similar to zombies and are often (75%) mistaken for them
when seen from a distance. Putrid flesh hangs loosely from their
bones. Their skulls are completely devoid of skin, with only a few
strands of hair and fungus remaining. Most revolting of all,
writhing green worms crawl in and out of every skull orifice.
Their clothing is usually filthy, tattered rags, but recent converts
occasionally have fine garments.

Combat: Sons of Kyuss are surrounded by a spherical! zone of
fear that is 30 feet in diameter. Those who fail saving throws vs.
spell when entering this zone flee in terror for one turn. Fleeing
characters are 60% likely to drop whatever they are carrying in
hand.

Sons can be turned by priests. Treat them as mummies on the
Turning Undead table.

Sons regenerate 2 hit points per round. Their limbs also regen-
erate, even if severed. Sons reduced to O or fewer hit points col-
lapse as if dead but continue to regenerate normally; they stand
up to fight when their hit points reach 1 or more. Fire, lightning,
acid, and holy water cause permanent damage to sons of Kyuss.
Pouring holy water or touching a holy symbol to the wounds of
sons stop them from regenerating; these procedures destroy them
if undertaken while they are at 0 hit points or less.

Sons are exceptionally strong. They attack in melee with a
double-handed flailing of fists, causing 1d8 points of damage.
Each hit has a 25% chance of inflicting a rotting disease on the
victim. This disease is fatal in 1d6 months. Each month that the
disease progresses, the victim loses 2 points of Charisma perma-
nently. The rotting disease can be cured only by the priest spell
cure disease. Victims suffering from the disease heal wounds at
10% of the normal rate. The disease also negates all cure wound
spells cast upon the victim.

In addition to flailing fists, one worm per round attempts to
jump from a son's head to a character the son is meleeing. The
worm needs only to roll a successful attack roll (same THACO as
the son) to land on the victim. The worm burrows into the victim
on the next round unless killed by the touch of cold iron, holy wa-
ter, or a blessed object. After penetrating the victim's skin, the

Eee =3J

   

 

 

 

 

 

worm burrows toward the victim's brain, taking 1d4 rounds to
reach it. During this time a remove curse or cure disease spell will
kill the worm, and neutralize poison or dispel evil will delay the
worm for 1d6 turns. If the worm reaches the brain, the victim dies
immediately and becomes a son of Kyuss. Decay and putrifica-
tion set in without further delay.

A cure disease or remove curse spell will transform a son into a
zombie, but both spells require that the priest touch the son. Any
character voluntarily touching a son is attacked by 1d4 worms.
These worms must roll a successful attacks to land on the charac-
ter.

Sons travel in pairs or threes, stalking ruins or dungeons in
search of victims. They attack unceasingly using their sphere of
fear to scatter their victims and then hunt them down individu-
ally.

Habitat/Society: Kyuss was an evil high priest who created the
first of these creatures, via a special curse, under instruction from
an evil deity. Since then the number of sons has increased dramat-
ically.

Sons are completely insane. There is no pattern to their wan-
derings. Some stalk the dungeon or ruin where they died, others
conceal themselves within crypts, a few walk the land in broad
daylight attacking settlements without hesitation.

Rumors persist that high-level evil clerics sometimes use sons to
spread terror, promising the sons eternal rest for their coopera-
tion.

Ecology: The worms are tied to the curse of the sons but exactly
how remains a mystery. It is known that the worms cannot sur-
vive apart from a victim or on a son. Worms that fail to burrow
into a victim die as soon as they touch the ground. Any worm re-
moved from a son dies within one round of separation from the
son who carried it. When a son is killed permanently, the worms
die with him. Some sages have proposed that the worms might
not be living creatures per se, but incarnations of the curse. Sons
keep no treasure hoard, but dungeons inhabited by sons often
contain items dropped by fleeing and past victims. Some sons still
wear precious items that they carried when they were trans-

formed.
Mist, Vampiric

 

   

 

      

GER)

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Non-arctic/Swamps and subterranean
FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Blood

INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)

TREASURE: (D)

ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil

 

NO. APPEARING: 1-3

ARMOR CLASS: 4 (8 when substantial)
MOVEMENT: 12 (6 when substantial)
HIT DICE: 3

THACO: See below

NO. OF ATTACKS: = 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK:; 1-8

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below
SIZE: M (5'-8' tall)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 270

These gaseous monsters prey on all living creatures, enveloping
them with their gaseous tendrils, then draining the blood for
food.

Vampiric mists appear as thick, billowing clouds, five to eight
feet in diameter. Color ranges from pale pink when hungry to
crimson red when sated, Vampiric mists speak no language, but
they communicate through a limited form of telepathy. These
creatures reek of old blood and are often smelled before seen.

Combat: Vampiric mists automatically sense the presence of
any warm-blooded creature within 50 feet. Hungry mists take the
shortest route possible to the victim, navigating by touch, flow-
ing easily over water or through narrow cracks. Their path can be
blocked by nonporous obstacles, but vampiric mists are intelli-
gent and if any reasonable path exists they will find it.

All vampiric mists have maximum hit points (8 per die) when
Full, but they are almost never encountered in this state. For each
12 hours a mist goes unfed, it loses 1 hit point. Vampiric mists
whose hit point totals reach 0 due to starvation die. To regain hit
points, vampiric mists must drain fresh blood from living victims
(hence the mist’s name). For each 2 hit points of blood drained,
the mist regains 1 hit point.

A vampiric mist may attack one victim per round by reaching
out with a gaseous tendril. Targets of a vampiric mist are treated
as AC 10. Modify this number by the victim's Dexterity, and by
the magical protection worn (+1, +2, etc.) but ignore magical
shields. The touch of a vampiric mist drains 1d8 points of blood.
A hit 4 above the needed to hit number means the mist has envel-
oped its victim. Enveloped victims are automatically hit each
round until either the mist dies, finishes feeding, or retreats. At-
tacks by other characters against an enveloping vampiric mist di-
vide their damage evenly—half against the mist, half against the
victim. Only the enveloped victim may attack the mist without
harm to himself, However, because of the disorienting effect of
rapid blood loss, enveloped victims may not use any spells or
magical! devices that require concentration,

While blood draining is mainly used to feed, the ability can also
be used in defense by sated vampiric mists. Extra blood is simply
dumped upon the ground.

Normally, a vampiric mist is damaged only by magical weapons

 

 

 

 

 

or by spells that effect air. Lightning bolt and magic missile are also
effective, However, immediately after reaching maximum hit
points a vampiric mist takes on substance. This substantial stage
last 1dé turns. During this time the mist’s movement rate slows to
6, its AC drops to 8, and it may be hit by normal weapons.

Blood draining is not a form of regeneration; a mist that loses
hit points in combat must heal those points normally. Keep track
of a mist’s current hit points and its maximum possible for that
combat (this total starts at 24 and goes down with damage caused
to the mist). Each time the mist is wounded, reduce both the cur-
rent hit points and the maximum. If the current hit point total
ever reaches 0, the mist dies. Hit points gained by draining blood
are added to the current hit points, which cannot exceed the maxi-
mum total (24 minus damage to the mist). Hit points lost due to
starvation are subtracted from the current hit points only. The
current hit points may never exceed the mist's maximum hit point
total. (After the current battle is over, the maximum hit point to-
tals for any surviving mists return to 24.)

Habitat/Society: These dread monsters inhabit both swamps,
where they creep along mixing in with morning and night fog,
and subterranean caverns, where they stalk prey in absolute
darkness. Vampiric mists attack at night or early morning, flow-
ing over the ground in search of warm-blooded victims. They
prefer lone victims, but hungry mists sometimes raid towns at
night, slaying livestock and draining victims in their sleep, before
slipping out at dawn.

Ecology: First thought to be immature forms of crimson death,
it is now known that these fiends were deliberately created by a
powerful vampire wizard.

Vampiric mists reproduce via division. A mist is 10% likely to
divide during its substantial stage immediately after feeding. The
two mists created have 3 Hit Dice each, but only 4 hit points per
die (thus they are born ravenously hungry).

Vampiric mists prey on all warm-blooded creatures. No ani-
mals hunt vampiric mist deliberately, though stirges, leeches, and
other bloodsuckers are sometimes drawn (fatally) to their smell.
Vampiric mists have no known life span. They live until they
starve, are slain, or reproduce.
Mite

 

 

 

 

 

Mite Snyad (Pestie)
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any/Subterranean Any/Subterranean
FREQUENCY: Rare Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Tribe Family
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any
DIET: Omnivore Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7) Low (5-7)
TREASURE: K (C) JO
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 6-24 1-8
ARMOR CLASS: 8 -4
MOVEMENT: 3 21
HIT DICE: 1-1 1-1
THACO: 20 20
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 Nil
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-3 Nil
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil Nil
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil See below

SIZE: T (2 tall) T (21/2" tall)
MORALE: Average (8-10) Average (8-10)
XP VALUE: 35 65

Mites, and the related snyads, are tiny, mischievous humanoids
that waylay dungeon adventurers for fun and profit.

Mites have hairless, warty skin varying in color form light gray
to bright violet. Their heads are triangular with bat-like ears and
along, hooked nose. Male mites sport a bone ridge down the cen-
ter of their skulls and short goatee beards. Many wear filthy rags
stolen from previous victirns. Their voices are high-pitched and
twittery, conveying only the simplest ideas to each other.

Combat: Mites try to catch lone travelers and stragglers using
pit-traps (1d6 points of damage), nets (successful saving throw
vs. paralysis or caught), and trip wires (successful Dexterity
check or fall prone). Prone or netted victims are swarmed over
and whacked at with weighted clubs (2% cumulative chance, per
club, of stunning the victim, but only if he’s in armor worse than
splint mail). The mites then bind their unconscious victim from
head to foot, then drag him down into their lair. Once inside the
victim is teased and twittered at for 1d4 days, the mites get bored
with him. They then stun their victim again, steal all his posses-
sions and deposit him at another point in the dungeon.

Habitat/Society: Mite lairs consist of dozens of tiny, intercon-
necting corridors built above and below the main corridors of the
dungeon, Numerous entrances connect the mite tunnels to the
dungeon, but all are hidden by carefully places stones (check for
secret doors to find a mite tunnel entrance). Mite corridors are
tiny by human and demihuman standards. Larger creatures, such
as men, havea —4 attack roll penalty and a +4 AC penalty when
fighting in a mite tunnel.

Mites are small and quick. They scurry to and fro through their
tunnels, stopping briefly to spy on the main tunnel, always chat-
tering and twittering to themselves.

Deep inside the mite tunnel system is a single, large, low-
ceilinged chamber. The mite king lives here, sitting on his tiny
throne, dressed in baggy clothes stolen from previous victims.
The mite king is a fierce (by mite standards) warrior with 1 +1 Hit
Dice. His bite causes 1d4 points of damage. Also in the chamber
are 4d6 mite women and 4d6 mite children. The women have 1-2
Hit Dice and bite for 1-2 points of damage. The children are non-
combatants.

 

 

 

 

 

The chamber itself is filthy and strewn with captured weapons,
armor, and clothes. Coins and such are carelessly thrown about,
but mites love bright, shiny gems. These are kept by the king,
who is allowed to play with them anytime he wants.

Mites are mischievous and curious. They pore for hours over
every little stolen item, poking and prodding, bending and tast-
ing, until either they grow bored, or, more likely, the item breaks.
They delight in wearing clothes several dozen sizes too large.
Mites are fond of bones, and they sometimes drag the skulls of
great monsters into their lair.

Ecology: Mites hunt vermin and other pests. They love iron ra-
tions. Mites are viewed as bite-sized snacks by most monsters.
Evil giants sometimes feature them as appetizers.

Snyad

Snyads are distant relatives of mites. Their love of treasure of-
ten compels them to steal from humans and demihumans. Snyads
resemble mites, but they are slightly larger (21/2 feet tall), have
full, though messy, heads of hair, and are light brown in color.

Snyads speak no known language but seem to communicate
with mites successfully. These two creatures sometimes team up,
with the mites distracting the victim, while the snyads dart in and
grab things.

Snyads steal with great skill, surprising their targets 90% of the
time, often snatching items directly from a person's hand, then
zipping back into their hole and hiding until the pursuers leave.
Spotting the entrance to a snyad lair requires a successful search
roll: a 1-in-3 chance for elves and a 1-in-4 chance for all others.

Snyads never attack, relying on their amazingly quick reflexes
to escape combat. They are not particularly strong, and any hu-
man or demihuman character with a Strength of 12 can capture a
snyad with a successful attack rol]. Captured smyads kick and
scream, squirming and twisting to get away, but never bite, (for
fear that the captor might bite back). Because of their high Dex-
terity, snyads gain a +3 bonus to their saving throws vs. dodge-
able spells.

Snyads live in immediate families, marrying for life.
 

  

 

 

IGREYHAWEN
Necrophidius Eee

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any/Land
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Average (10)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 2
MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 2

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-8

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Paralyzation and see below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Immune to poison and see below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: L (12' long)
MORALE: Fearless (19-20)
XP VALUE: 270

The necrophidius, called the “death worm” by some, is an artifi-
cial creature, built and animated by a wizard or priest for a single
task, such as protecting a particular treasure or assassinating a
specific target.

The necrophidius resembles a bleached-white skeleton of a gi-
ant snake, topped by a fanged human skull with constantly whirl-
ing, milk-white eyes. The death worm’s bones are warm to the
touch. The necrophidius is nearly undetectable to most senses. It
is absolutely silent; it may open a door and cause the hinges to
creak, but it makes no noise whatsoever even when slithering
across a floor strewn with leaves. The necrophidius has no odor.
The necrophidius keeps up a constant motion, moving with a ma-
cabre grace.

Combat: Whenever possible, the necrophidius attacks with sur-
prise, The creature's silence imposes a —2 penalty to its oppo-
nents’ surprise rolls. If it is not itself surprised, it executes a
movement commonly referred to as the Dance of Death, a hyp-
notic swaying, backed by minor magical effects. The Dance of
Death rivets the attention of any victim observing the necrophi-
dius, unless he rolls a successful saving throw vs. spell. In this
condition, an intelligent opponent is unable to make any action,
as per the effects of the hypnotism spell. This enables the ne-
crophidius to advance and attack without opposition.

Its bite causes 1d8 points of damage and requires another sav-
ing throw vs. spell, A character who fails this saving throw is par-
alyzed for 1d4 turns. This effect is magical, and while a dispel
magic would end its effects, a neutralize poison would not. The
victim is not conscious during the paralysis.

The intelligence of a necrophidius is magically imbued; the
monster does not have a real mind. As such, mind-influencing
spells, such as sleep or cause fear, have no effect on a necrophi-
dius. It is not alive in any sense of the word, and poisons have no
effect upon it. It does not require sleep or any sustenance. Despite
a number of characteristics to the contrary, a necrophidius is not
an undead creature and cannot be turned.

Habitat/Society: A necrophidius is created for a single purpose.
It may be created in one of three ways. The first is via a magical
tome, akin to a manual of golems can provide secrets of the ne-

 

      
 

ad

war.

i
FY

 

ALARA
tie poe

 

 

crophidius’s construction (the Necrophidicon, as it is sometimes
called, must be burnt to ashes, which provides the animating
force for the monster). Alternatively, a wizard can create a ne-
crophidius by his own means. This process is long and complex,
and requires that the wizard be able to cast limited wish. geas,
and charm person spells, The third method enables a high-level
priest of some Powers to build a necrophidius. Again, the method
is long and tedious. It requires the spells quest, neutralize poison,
prayer, silence, and snake charm. Whichever method is used, the
monster requires the complete skeleton of a giant snake (either
poisonous or constrictor) slain within 24 hours of the enchant-
ment's commencement. The construction takes 500 gold pieces
worth of herbs and ointments per hit point of the necrophidius:
and ten days are required.

A necrophidius is built for a specific purpose (which must be
in the spellcaster's mind when he creates it), such as “Kill Ragnar
the Bold” or “Keep the Scepter of Trystom safe on this altar.” The
necrophidius has a reasonable intelligence, and does not seek to
twist the intent of its maker, but its enchantments fade when its
task is done or cannot be completed, for example, when it kills
Ragnar, or when the owner decides to use the Scepter of
Trystom.

The crafter must want the necrophidius to serve its purpose. He
could not, for example, build a death worm to “Sneak into the
druid’s hut and steal his staff,” if the crafter really intended for the
necrophidius to merely provide a distraction. He could not build
more than one death worm and assign each of them to kill
Ragnar, since he could not imbue in the second death worm a task
that he intended the first one to complete. For this reason, ne-
crophidii are almost never seen working as a team.

There are rumors, not well-founded, that there were once
methods to make a necrophidius that conformed to all current
specifications except that it gained 1 Hit Die every century it was
pursuing its purpose.

Ecology: The necrophidius does not eat, nor does it provide any
useful ecological function. It is effectively outside the ecosystem
around it.
Needleman

   

CJ

ef ES

y

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate/ Forests
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Grove
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day
DIET: Photosynthetic carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: G
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 5-50
ARMOR CLASS: 6
MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 3+4
THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 or 1-6
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 3-12 or 1-2
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Surprise
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (6’ tall)
MORALE; Steady (12)
XP VALUE: 120

This wood-dwelling, intelligent form of plant life has many simi-
larities to a zombie, but it is in fact neither animal nor undead.

Needlemen appear ruddy green, mottled with browns and reds
in autumn. They do not grow dormant in winter, as they lack
roots to hold sap. Instead, they turn deep brown, to change to
green again in the spring. Their eyes are coal-black, and their skin
is covered with masses of small, sharp needles. When needlemen
attack, they growl and shout in a gurgling, choking language that
is incomprehensible to anyone else.

Needleman physiques are exclusively male. (Actually, like all
complex plant life, needlemen are hermaphroditic, and can cross-
pollinate.) From a human standpoint, most needlemen are emaci-
ated. Some wear white woolen robes, but as this garment
interferes with both the needleman’s combat abilities and its skills
at hiding in dense undergrowth, most needlemen shun these (per-
haps ceremonial) robes in favor of a tight-fitting yellow breech-
cloth.

Combat: A needleman attacks with its small, sharp needles.
The traditional attack is a slap. The slap itself causes only 1d4
points of damage, but the sharp needles triple this injury for a to-
tal of 3d4 points. This damage should be treated as impaling, and
large creatures with thick hides suffer only 2d4 points of damage.
Needlemen are also able to fire their needles at a distance. One
of these creatures can launch a volley of 1d6 needles, each causing
1-2 points of damage (only 1 point to larger-than-man-sized op-
ponents). A needleman has a range of 20 feet with this attack. For
practical purposes, a needleman’s supply of needles is infinite.
The creature is particularly vulnerable to magic. Attacks on it
by magical means inflict triple normal damage, though it receives
a saving throw. For example, a magic missile that would nor-
mally cause only 1d4+1 points of damage would inflict 3d4 +3
points on a needleman. But it is only direct magical attacks that
the needleman finds himself vulnerable against. A magically en-

 

 

 

 

 

 

larged or strengthened character wielding a sword +2 finds the
weapon's damage bonus (but not attack roll bonus) tripled to +6,
but neither the weapon’s normal damage nor the additional dam-
age caused by the character's greater Strength would triple.

Spells of a nonoffensive nature, like charm plants, are triply ef-
fective against needlemen. Of course, the fact that it is a plant
makes it immune to certain spells. Needlemen are intelligent and
can be affected (at triple potency) by mind-influencing spells.

When amidst heavy undergrowth or conifers, needlemen are
nearly undetectable (75% hidden from active searchers, or 40%
against elves and thieves). In such areas, they impose a —5 pen-
alty to their opponents’ surprise rolls (—2 to elves and thieves). It
is freakishly rare to encounter this creature outside of its natural
habitat.

Habitat/Society: Needlemen lack the intelligence for a true soci-
ety. They wander about their forests, picking up shiny trinkets
(some few of which may be valuable) and moaning sadly to one
another.

One clue to their origin is the virulent hatred needlemen have
for elves. Needlemen can smell elves at a quarter-mile, and attack
them furiously. One theory holds that needlemen were originally
a band of humans who happened upon wood elves or grugach in
their home communities. If the elves had attempted to kill or inca-
pacitate the intruders, as is likely, the humans might have in-
voked supernatural aid, And a evil or twisted trickster deity, such
as Ralishaz, might have transformed the humans into woodland
creatures better suited to battle elves.

Ecology: Needlemen derive most of their sustenance from sun-
light, but they require water and nutrients as do most humanoids.
They usually kill small creatures like squirrels, but, naturally,
prefer the taste of elves.
Plant, Carnivorous

 

 

 

 

Cactus, Vampire

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any / Deserts
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Special
INTELLIGENCE: Non- (0)
TREASURE: Incidental
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1-3

ARMOR CLASS: 6 (core), 7 (leaf), 8 (thread)
MOVEMENT: 0

HIT DICE: 3 (core), 1+1 (leaf), 4 hp (thread)
THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 12

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 12x12

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Blood drain

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: Medium (5'-6’ tall)
MORALE: Fanatic (17-18)

XP VALUE: 650

Vampire cacti are plants of the deep desert that supplement their
water supply by draining liquids from animals that come within
range.

Vampire cacti resemble century plants, with 12 fleshy leaves,
each tipped with a sharp needle about one inch long. Sprouting
from the plant's central core is a single spike rising to a height of
five to six feet. The leaves are about five feet long, but droop to-
ward the ground so the main body of the plant stands about three
feet high. The leaves are dusty green with a narrow band of yel-
low around their margins. The needles on their tips are white.
The central spike is golden yellow. Once every midsummer a sin-
gle small flower blooms at the top of the central spike. This flower
is blood-red in color. After this flower has been pollinated, a
small blood-red fruit forms. The fruit is moist and sweet-tasting,
almost irresistible to most birds.

The plant itself is rooted to one spot, but it can move its leaves
rapidly. Vampire cacti are usually surrounded by the skeletons
and drained corpses of warm-blooded denizens of the desert (kan-
garoo rats, etc.).

Combat: The vampire cactus attacks by shooting the needles at
the tips of its leaves into its victim. These needles have a range of
three yards. They remain attached to the leaves by a thick, rub-
bery thread that unreels from within the leaf. This thread is the
vessel through which the plant drains its victim’s bodily fluids.
The needles inflict 1-2 points of damage when they strike. Each
subsequent round, the plant drains 1d3 points of liquid (i.e.,
blood) through each needle that remains in its victim’s flesh. The
victim can tear free or pull the needles loose, but they are vi-
ciously barbed and pulling them out of flesh causes 1d3 points of
damage each. The plant can fire all 12 needles simultaneously, but
no more than six can be directed at a single target. Any needle
that fails to penetrate its target is reeled in and is ready to be fired
again by the beginning of the next melee round. Once a target is
dead, the plant reels in the needles from that target and readies
them to fire at any other victim that presents itself. The plant be-
comes satiated after draining 50 hit points, When it reaches satia-

 

 

 

 

 

tion, it reels in all its needles and does not attack anything again
for 48 hours.

The threads connecting the needles to the leaves are AC 8 and
can suffer 4 points of damage before being severed. The leaves are
AC 7, and each has 1+1 Hit Dice. Damage to threads or leaves
does no permanent harm to the plant, since it can regrow a dam-
aged leaf in 1d4 +1 days (although destroying a leaf or severing a
thread decreases the plant's number of attacks, of course). The
only way to kill the plant is to destroy its core, The core is AC 6
and has 3 Hit Dice. Damage done to the leaves doesn't count
against this total. Because the core is surrounded by leaves that
move, any attack directed at the core has a 75% chance of hitting
a leaf instead (providing, of course, that all of the leaves have not
already been dealt with).

Vampire cacti are immune to lightning and electrical attacks
(they ground the electricity into the desert through their roots).
They're very vulnerable to fire, however, and fire-based attacks
inflict double damage. Since they have no minds, sleep, charm, il-
lusion, and other mind-affecting spells have no effect.

Habitat/Society: Creatures of the Bright Desert, vampire cacti
evolved their blood-draining ability to help meet their water
needs. Other adaptations to life in the deep desert include the
dusty-looking surface of their leaves (to help slow down evapora-
tion), the single small bloom (to minimize water loss), and a con-
ductive root system (vampire cacti are often the tallest objects
around, and hence frequently struck by desert lightning). Migrat-
ing birds seem to have carried the seeds of vampire cacti to the
margins of the Dry Steppes, and even to the forbidden Sea of
Dust, because some of these deadly plants are found there.

The only treasures to be found near a vampire cactus are the
possessions of any unlucky victims.

Ecology: Nothing eats the vampire cactus; its tissue is too tough
and bitter (in contrast to its fruit). Anything warm-blooded is a
potential victim for the cactus.
Plant, Carnivorous

 

 

 

 

 

Kampfult Polyp, Giant

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any/Subterranean Any/Subterranean
water

FREQUENCY: Very Rare Very Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any
DIET: Carnivore Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7) Low (5-7)
TREASURE: Incidental Incidental
ALIGNMENT: Neutral (evil) Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING; 1 1
ARMOR CLASS: 4 6
MOVEMENT: 3 0
HIT DICE: 2 7
THACO: 19 13
NO. OF ATTACKS: 6 24
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1 1-2 per tentacle
SPECIAL ATTACKS: -—3 penalty to Paralyzation

opponents’ surprise
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil Sharp spines
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil Nil

SIZE: S (stump-like) L (10' tall)
MORALE: Steady (11-12) Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: 175 2,000

These two species of deadly plants are considered to be corrupted
offshoots of treants. As such, these creatures tend to resemble
withered, decrepit old trees of various species common to the lo-
cal area,

Kampfult

The kampfult, also known as the sinewy mugger, has a rope-like
body with a central core that resembles the decayed stump of a
cut-down tree.

A kampfult has six attack appendages of about six feet in length
and six movement appendages of one foot in length. These are
spaced along the four-foot-long, stump-like body segment. Sev-
eral creatures can be attacked at the same time. Once hit by an ap-
pendage, the victim is wrapped up until either the kampfult is
slain or the victim frees himself (those with a Strength of 16 of
more can free themselves automatically in one round; others
must roll a successful Strength check). Only the central section of
the creature need be attacked to kill the beast, but severing its ten-
tacles can succeed in rendering a kampfult harmless. Each tenta-
cle requires 2 points of cutting damage to sever and causes 1 point
per round of constriction damage. All portions of a kampfult are
considered AC 4.

The monster can hold out or pull in its appendages in order to
disguise itself, and when doing so it imposes a —3 penalty to its
opponents’ surprise rolls. The kampfult originally inhabited thick
woodlands where it disguised its rope-like body among vines and
creepers.

Unsuspecting prey would then be trapped as the kampfult
looped its coils of vine-like appendages around the victim, crush-
ing and strangling it to death. Actively hunted down by humans,
the few remaining monsters of this kind are now typically found
in ruins or dungeons. There, appearing to be ropes or nets, the
monsters surprise the unwary.

Kampfults are carnivorous but relatively weak, They prefer to
attack small, solitary mammals, as these are usually the most vul-
nerable and require the least amount of work to secure. A kamp-
fult spends much of its day capturing mice and squirrels for food;
it rarely snags anything larger.

 

 

 

 

 

The underside of a kampfult’s central core is soft and very po-
rous. This portion of the monster is placed directly on top of any
killed prey, and the kampfult accelerates the absorption process
by spraying a decay catalyst on its food. This catalyst affects
nothing but organic tissue, so any incidental treasure left over
from deceased victims is always found beneath the stump area of
a kampfult.

Giant Polyp

This large, tree-like creature is a semi-sentient, gigantic variety of
polyp, similar to a sea anemone.

Much like the kampfult and other deadly plants, the giant
polyp attacks with tentacles attached to a strong central core.
Every giant polyp has 24 tentacles with which to attack, but their
even placement around the central core makes it impossible for
more than three tentacles to attack any man-sized target. Each 15-
foot-long tentacle causes 1-2 points of damage when it hits; a sav-
ing throw vs. poison must be rolled with a +2 bonus. If the save
is failed, the victim is paralyzed for one turn, during which time
the monster drags the helpless victim into its huge mouth (located
at the very bottom of the trunk, usually concealed). It takes two
rounds for the victim to reach the mouth, and five rounds later
the victim is completely digested by the immensely powerful di-
gestive agents within.

Each tentacle can receive 4 points of cutting damage before be-
ing severed; severed tentacles regenerate fully in 2d6 days. The
only way to permanently kill a giant polyp is to attack the trunk,
which is protected by hundreds of razor-sharp spikes. Any char-
acter who engages in melee with the trunk is struck by 1d4 of
these spikes, and each spikes causes 1d4 points of damage.

By all accounts, the best way to deal with a giant polyp is by
spellcasting, most notably fire spells. All fire-based attacks add 2
to each die of damage rolled. Tentacles suffer damage as we'l,
should a fireball or like spell encompass the entire creature.

Giant polyps grow in dark, subterranean chambers filled with
pools of dark, stagnant water. Otherwise, they conform rather
closely to the habits of their distant cousin, the kampfults.
Rat

 

 

 

 

: - SEM

 

Camprat Vapor Rat
CLIMATE/TERRAIN:  Any/Barrens Any/Cloud islands

and hills
FREQUENCY: Common Rare
ORGANIZATION: Pack Pack
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night Any
DIET: Onmnivore Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Animal (1) Low (5-7)
TREASURE: Nil Incidental
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Chaotic neutral
NO. APPEARING: 11-30 2-16
ARMOR CLASS: 6 6 (or special)
MOVEMENT: 15 12, Fl 6 (Gaseous 1)
HIT DICE: 1-2 hp 2
THACO: 20 19
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 1
DAMAGEF/ATTACK: 1 1-2
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil Nil
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil Stinking cloud
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil Nil
SIZE: T (8" long) T (1’ long)
MORALE: Unsteady (5-7) Unsteady (5-7)
XP VALUE: 7 35
Camprat

Camprats are rodents with voracious appetites that belie their
small size. They're generally harmless, but their ability to get
their teeth into anything edible is aggravating to travelers.

Camprats are similar in appearance to prairie dogs or small go-
phers. Their fur is light, sandy brown, shading to dark brown or
even black in a streak down their spine. They have a tiny stub of a
tail. Their eyes are small and beady, and their front teeth are long
and exceedingly sharp. The creatures move very quickly, and can
climb just about anything.

Combat: Camprats are timid creatures, and fight only if cor-
nered. If they must fight, however, their razor-sharp front teeth
can pierce leather as easily as thin cloth. The creatures would
much rather flee than fight—climbing, jumping over, or gnawing
through obstacles. Unlike normal rats, camprats are clean and
carry no significant risk of disease. Because they can move so
witty they're difficult to hit (thus their relatively high Armor
ass).

Habitat/Society: Like rats, camprats live in loosely-bonded
packs, with males and females in roughly equal numbers. There is
no pack leader and no organization to speak of.

Camprats are fast-moving and can make astounding leaps; up
to eight feet horizontally and three feet vertically. They can climb
any surface that offers the slightest purchase to their tiny claws.
Their front teeth grow constantly, and the creatures must gnaw
on things to prevent them from growing too long. This gnawing
also keeps the teeth sharp. Camprats can chew through thick
cloth (for example, a sack in five seconds, thin leather in 15 sec-
onds, and thick leather in 30 seconds). Even wood presents little
problem: they can gnaw through one inch of wood in 60 seconds
(soft wood) to 90 seconds (hard wood).

The camprat's diet is simple: they eat anything that’s not on
fire, They're continuously scavenging, and go to great lengths to
steal food. Typical precautions taken by travelers—storing food
overnight in thick leather sacks or hanging it from tree
branches—won't deter camprats, making them a major irritant
for people traveling through barrens and hills.

Knowledgeable travelers are often warned of the presence of

 

 

 

 

 

camprats by dead tress in the area; the creatures gnaw on the
bark, frequently to the extent of banding and killing the trees.
Camprats are irritatingly common in most hills and barrens, in-
cluding the Hestmark Highlands, the Abbor-Alz, and the Kron
Hills. In fact, there are tales that a gnomish king of centuries ago
spent a decade trying to rid the Kron Hills of camprats (with no
success, of course).

Ecology: Camprats are pure scavengers; they eat anything they
can find, but they don't hunt. They have reason to be timid:
Many large carnivores consider camprats to be delicacies. Ogres
love live camprats, and young red dragons often breathe fire into
camprat holes, then dig out the cooked appetizers within.

Vapor Rats

Vapor rats appear to be nothing more than large, gray, giant rats.
Their habitat, however, includes areas not common to giant rats,
for these creatures also dwell in and on the substantial cloud is-
lands that frequently serve as the abode of cloud giants and cloud
dragons.

If angry, hungry, or cornered, vapor rats attack by scurrying in

-and delivering a sharp bite. Whenever one is killed, it gives off a

small puff of noxious fumes. This gaseous release is the equiva-
lent of the stinking cloud spell, but it affects only one individual
within eight feet of the vapor rat. The rat always directs its release
toward its opponent, and the gas dissipates to harmlessness be-
yond eight feet. Thus, while it is safe to slay these creatures at a
distance, they are particularly dangerous in close proximity.

It is possible for vapor rats to alter the substance of their bodies
and assume a gaseous form. In this condition they appear to be
wisps of cloud or similar vapors. In their vaporous condition they
are able to direct their movements much as a ship would steer be-
fore the wind, and they are thus able to move from cloud to cloud
around the sky.

Wounded or seriously threatened vapor rats always assume
gaseous form. In such a state they can be harmed only by attack
forms that cause their vapors to be destroyed. These include very
hot or magical fire, lightning, and exceptionally strong winds (see
the potion of gaseous form for more details).
Raven (Crow)

 

 

 

 

 

 

Ordinary Huge Giant
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any/Land Any/Land Any/Land
FREQUENCY: Common Rare Rare
ORGANIZATION: Flock Flock Flock
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day Day Day
DIET: _ Omnivore Omnivore Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Animal (1) ‘Semi- (2-4) Low (5-7)
TREASURE: See below See below See below
ALIGNMENT: Neutral ‘Neutral (evil) Neutral (evil)
NO. APPEARING: 4-36 2-8 4-16
ARMOR CLASS: 7 6 4
MOVEMENT: 1, Fl 36 1, Fl 27 3, Fl18
HIT DICE: 1-2 hp 1-1 3+2
THACO: 20 20 17
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 1 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1 1-2 3-6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Eye peck Eye peck Nil
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Not surprised Not surprised Not surprised
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil Nil Nil
SIZE: S (2'-4' span) M (4'-6' span) L (6'-10' span)
MORALE: Average (8-10) Steady (11-12) Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 15 35 175

Ravens and crows are large, black birds known primarily as one
of nature's primary scavengers. They are often mistaken as bad
omens by superstitious farmers and peasants. In fact, popular
mythology supports these views, as many religions speak often of
the “evil black” raven and the “trickster” crow.

Ravens and crows have their own limited language. Certain
ravens, including some huge and most giant specimens, can speak
as many as 100 words of the common tongue and can communi-
cate in meaningful phrases (depending on intelligence, of course).
For this and other reasons (like their usefulness as garbage dis-
posals, guardians, and vermin hunters), most ravens and crows
make very fine house and yard pets.

Combat: Because of the use of scouts within the flock of birds
(see below), ravens and crows cannot be surprised during day-
light conditions. Ravens and crows attack with both their strong
claws and their long, sharp beaks. However, the claws are used
mostly for balance and often to obscure the sight of the victim, so
only the beak causes actual physica] damage. Therefore, ravens
and crows employ a grab and peck approach to combat.

Because of their intelligence, these birds are 10% likely to at-
tack an opponent's eye. In other words, whenever an attack roll
indicates a hit, there is a 1 in 10 chance of an eye attack and a re-
sulting loss of that organ.

Ravens and crows are not adverse to teaming up against a sin-
gle foe, and the chance of blinding a potential victim increases
dramatically as the number of birds attacking increases. Fortu-
nately, the rules for multiple attackers in the Dungeon Master's
Guide apply to these creatures as well.

Habitat/Society: Ravens and crows are found from cold-
temperate to tropical climes. All birds of this type travel in flocks.
Any that are encountered alone are actually scouts. As soon as
any approaching creature that could threaten the flock is seen or
detected, the scouts give warning cries, screen themselves, and
maintain a safe distance while keeping track of the creatures and
reporting events to the flock by means of raucous calls. In any
case, all ravens and crows are fiercely loyal to the few friends they
make in a lifetime.

Ravens and crows are principally scavengers, but, be-
ing omnivorous, they also raid crops, nests, or unattended caches
of food. Tales of giant ravens spiriting off babes from their cribs
are more likely frightening myths than proven fact, but this feat is
possible nonetheless.

All birds of this sort love objects that glitter and shine. Thus
they are 25% likely to have several small metal objects, gems,
and the like in their nests. In general, the larger the raven (or
crow) and the greater the size of the flock, the more valuable and
wondrous the small treasures found within.

In fact, some of these birds have been trained to recover such
objects with startling results. More than a few simple bird trainers
have acquired enough minor magical rings and precious stones to
retire in wealth and comfort. Naturally, the specific training
methods employed are closely guarded secrets.

Huge Ravens

Huge ravens tend toward malicious dispositions and are known
to serve evil masters when opportunity permits. However, not all
raven familiars and consorts are evil, as the alignment of the mas-
ter is a decisive factor in such arrangements.

Giant Ravens

Giant ravens are both pugnacious and easily raised (if trained
from fledglings), and so are often used as guards and messengers.
While they are decidedly too small to be used as mounts by all but
the smallest of humanoids (i.e., faerie folk and characters under
the effects of a potion of diminution), the strength of these power-
ful birds is enough to carry even an adult halfling on an aerial
journey. Fortunately, these journeys are rarely more than danger-
ous pranks, as giant crows, like their smaller brethren, are not
fond of dining on meals that are still wiggling. However, more
than a few halflings and gnomes have found themselves high atop
a barn or mountain ledge with no safe means of descent (much to
the amusement of their comrades).
\

Scarecrow

 

 

 

 

 

~ CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any/Land
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Non- (0)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Evil (lawful, neutral, or chaotic)
NO. APPEARING: 1
ARMOR CLASS: 6
MOVEMENT: 6
HIT DICE; 5
THACO: 15
NO, OF ATTACKS: 1+ gaze
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6+charm
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Charm (see below)
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil
SIZE: M (6' tall)
MORALE: Elite (13-14) (if conscious)
XP VALUE: 1,400

Scarecrows are powerful enchanted creatures made from the
same materials as normal scarecrows. They are non-intelligent
but capable of following simple instructions from the priest who
created them.

Each scarecrow is unique in appearance but all share several
common characteristics. Their bodies, arms, and legs are always
made of cut wood (such as a broom stick or garden stake) and
bound together with hemp rope. Tattered rags cover the frame
and are sometimes stuffed with grass or straw. A hollow gourd
with a face carved into it serves as head. Once animated, a fiery
light burns in the scarecrow’s eye sockets. They are always of ma-
lign intent.

Scarecrows are light but slow. Their leg and elbow joints bend
both ways, causing them to move with an uneven, jerky gait. The
head spins freely.

Scarecrows speak no language, but cackle hyena-like when at-
tacking.

Combat: Once every round, a scarecrow may gaze at one crea-
ture within 40 feet. Any intelligent human or demihuman meeting
this gaze becomes charmed unless he rolls a successful saving
throw vs. spell. The charm is one of absolute fascination rather
than obedience to command. While charmed the victim stands
transfixed, arms hanging limply, allowing the scarecrow to strike
again and again (automatic hit each round). The charm lasts until
either the scarecrow leaves the area for one full turn, or it is
killed.

The touch of scarecrows causes 1d6 points of damage and has
an identical charm effect (saving throws apply). Because of their
construction, scarecrows are especially susceptible to fire, All
fire-based attacks gain a +1 bonus to the attack roll and a +1
damage bonus per die of damage. They are unaffected by sleep,
charm, hold, or suggestion spells, and they are immune to cold-
based attacks.

A scarecrow attacks one victim at a time, striking the first per-
son it charmed repeatedly until he is dead. While slaying its vic-
tim, the scarecrow uses its gaze attack to charm as many other

 

 

 

 

 

opponents as possible. Scarecrows always attack until destroyed
or ordered to stop.

Habitat/Society: Scarecrows have no preferred habitat or soci-
ety. They exist only to serve the priest who created them. They
follow any simple one- or two-phrase order to the best of their
ability, without regard to their own safety.

To create a scarecrow, either a special manual must be used or a
high-level priest must employ the following spells: animate ob-
ject, prayer, command, and quest. The construction requires
three weeks work, but material costs are small—one gold piece
per hit point the scarecrow possesses. The final step of the proc-
ess, casting the quest spell, is done during a new moon.

Scarecrows can be constructed to kill a specific person. To do
so, the clothes worn by the scarecrow must come from the in-
tended victim. Once the scarecrow is animated, the priest need
only utter a single word— “Quest.” The scarecrow then moves ina
direct line toward the victim, Upon reaching the victim, the scare-
crow disregards all other beings and concentrates its gaze and at-
tacks entirely on the person it has been quested to kill. After
slaying its victim, a quested scarecrow’s magic dissipates and it
collapses into dust.

Ecology: As constructs, scarecrows have no life span. The
magic that created them keeps their tattered parts from decom-
posing and shields them from the effects of cold.

Conscious Scarecrows

Most scarecrows disintegrate upon the death of their creator,
however a few (10%) become conscious. These scarecrows have
low intelligence but possess a devilish cunning. They stalk the
land committing acts of evil by night and hiding during daylight
hours. Because scarecrows hate fire and are unaffected by cold,
conscious scarecrows try to reach colder climes. During the trek
the scarecrows kill all they encounter, including those who pose
no threat. Conscious scarecrows hate all life and kill humans and
demihumans whenever possible.
Shadow, Slow

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any/Subterranean and ruins
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Band
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Living beings
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: F
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO, APPEARING: 4-16

ARMOR CLASS: 8
MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 4

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Slow, surprise
SPECIAL DEFENSES: +2 or better to hit
MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below
SIZE: M (4’-6' across)
MORALE: Special

XP VALUE: 650

Slow shadows are undead creatures that prey upon humans and
demihumans. They are similar in many ways to shadows and,
like shadows, exist primarily on the Negative Material plane.

Slow shadows appear as pitch-black blobs, with amorphous
twistings to their outlines, which make them appear to grow or
shrink (from four to six feet across) as they move. Slow shadows
are 90% invisible in dusky or moderate light, such as torchlight,
and 50% undetectable in full daylight. In darkness slow shadows
are invisible to normal vision, but stand out against warm sur-
faces when seen with infravision.

Combat: Slow shadows impose a —6 penalty to their oppo-
nents’ surprise rolls. They attach themselves to their victims with
a successful attack roll. Attached slow shadows inflict 1d4 points
of cold-based damage and slow their victim as per the spell (no
saving throw allowed). Every round thereafter, the victim auto-
matically loses another 1d4 points until either the victim dies, the
slow shadow dies, or it is driven off. Multiple slow shadows at-
tached to a single victim inflict cumulative damage. The slow ef-
fect, however, is not cumulative.

Slow shadows are not affected by cold, lightning, hold, charm,
or weapons of less than +2 enchantment. They can be turned by
a priest. A single haste spell drives 2d10 slow shadows away, if
cast before they attach themselves to their victims.

Humanoids killed by slow shadows become lesser slow
shadows within one turn. Lesser slow shadows have all of the
abilities of slow shadows but must remain within 40 feet of where
they changed or within a 40-foot range of the shadows who slew
them. Concentrations of 20 or more lesser slow shadows are very
rarely found. The change can be prevented by casting remove
curse on the body. Once the change has taken place, recovery is
practically impossible.

Slow shadows roam through dungeons and ruins searching for
humans and demihumans to transform, They can sense such crea-
tures up to 100 feet away. Once a victim is found, the slow
shadows withdraw into the surrounding cracks and corners and
wait for the victim to come to them. When the victim passes, by
the shadows rush out and attack.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Slow shadow bands have no discernible orga-
nization. They wander freely throughout the dungeon or ruin
they haunt, attacking all humans who come within range. They
are violent and aggressive, but they withdraw if confronted by a
superior foe.

Slow shadows despise all living creatures; they find the mere
presence of living creatures painful. They hate treasure, as it re-
minds them of the comforts of life, and they destroy or hide all
precious items that fall into their hands.

Slow shadows never travel outdoors unless an extended period
of time (ten years) goes by without a human entering the dungeon
they haunt. Even then, the slow shadows travel only at night, flit-
ting swiftly across the land in search of a new dungeon to wander.

Ecology: Slow shadows, like shadows, are believed to be a race
of long-dead people cursed to madness and a split existence on the
Prime and Negative Material planes. This curse drives slow
shadows to hunt and transform living humanoids and demihu-
mans into slow shadows like themselves.

Sages speculate that shadows and slow shadows, when they
lived, were bitter enemies. Their cruel, wicked ways and constant
warfare brought down a terrible curse upon both races. Now the
two people continue their ancient battle, never dying, cursed to
insanity, recruiting new shadows and slow shadows from the liv-
ing. On rare occasions, battles between shadows and slow
shadows have been witnessed and it seems that vanquished slow
shadows become shadows and vanquished shadows become slow
shadows.

As with shadows, no one has ever successfully removed the
curse from a slow shadow. If a way is ever found, however, anda
slow shadow can be spoken to, it may be possible to break the
curse that created the two races of shadows. Removing this curse
would free al] shadows from their wanderings and the Prime Ma-
terial plane from the terror of slow shadows and their shadow
kin. It is not known, though, whether removing the curse would
grant the shadowkind eternal rest.
—

Skulk

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate to tropical /Woodlands
and subterranean

FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Band

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Omnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil

NO. APPEARING: 1-8

ARMOR CLASS: 7

MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 2

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: I

DAMAGE/ATTACK;: By weapon

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Backstab

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: M (5’-6' tall)

MORALE: Unsteady (5-7)

XP VALUE: 120

Skulks are an extremely cowardly, evil race of humanoids with
the chameleon-like ability to blend in with any background. They
survive on the edges of civilization by theft and murder.

Skulks stand five to six feet tall and are completely devoid of
hair. They are elf-like in stature, with graceful limbs, soft facial
features, and pink or blue eyes. A skulk’s skin is smooth but leath-
ery tough. Its natural color is light gray, but skulks can change
skin color instantly, either to flesh tone or, more commonly, to
match the surrounding environment.

Skulks speak common and 20% of skulks speak one additional
demihuman language, usually elvish or dwarf.

Combat: Skulks are cowardly fighters who run away at first
wounding or if the odds are less than two to one in their favor—
whichever comes first.

They move quickly and quietly, freezing into immobility at any
sign of danger and blending into the background. Immobile
skulks are 90% likely to be passed by unnoticed, Creatures look-
ing directly at the skulks when they change color are not fooled.

Skulks never engage in direct combat unless trapped. Their fa-
vorite attack is backstabbing. Skulks move with absolute silence
and impose a — 3 penalty to opponents’ surprise rolls. Skulks that
surprise their opponents usually backstab. This attack gains a +4
bonus to the attack roll and damage is tripled (as Sth-level
thieves). Base damage is determined by weapon type, usually a
dagger (60% ) or short sword (40%).

Skulks can pass through forest and in subterranean settings al-
most without a trace. Anyone following a skulk in these sur-
roundings has !/s their normal chance to track successfully.

Habitat/Society: Skulks survive by thievery and murder. They
live in small bands, moving often, and camping in deep forests or
underground lairs. They hide by day, but emerge at night to raid
nearby human or demihuman communities. Their favorite tactic
is to murder an entire family, then ransack the house at their lei-
sure,

A skulk lair is usually a shallow cave with two or more en-
trances, located just outside (or sometimes beneath) the town.

 

 

 

SS

a
oo

a

 

 

 

 

Skillfully placed branches and leaves cover the entrance. A suc-
cessful find secret doors roll is required to find the entrance to a
skulk Jair. Inside are a number of sleeping mats. During the day
1d3 skulk children are found here, usually unguarded. There is a
10% chance that one of the children is less than two years of age.
In that case a single skulk female will be in the cave. If the cave is
discovered, the skulk female will flee, leaving the children to their
fate.

Skulks often try to disrupt the society they prey upon. A com-
mon ploy is to murder a low-level political official (judge, council
member, town steward, etc.), then leave behind false clues stolen
from a local thieves’ guild or orc tribe. Once suspicion is diverted,
the skulks can go about their business, murdering and looting
with impunity.

Most skulks are panic prone, but very rarely (1%) a leader is
born. Skulk leaders are demanding and cruel. They have 3 Hit
Dice and can speak two additional languages. Skulk leaders are
masters of disguise and sometimes pose as half-elves or humans.
While in this disguise, skulk leaders mingle freely with the outside
world, casing a town before leading an attack on it. Normal
skulks will abide by a leader's commands so long as they aren't
too daring. Skulk leaders sometimes deal with other creatures,
particularly dopplegangers or assassin guilds.

Ecology: Skulks eat whatever they find in the pantry of their
victims. In hard times, skulks steal livestock, leaving a hole in the
fence so it appears the animal escaped accidentally.

In addition to food, skulks steal whatever strikes their fancy.
Female skulks often take gold, jewelry, and fine cloths. Male
skulks are apt to lug furniture back to their camp. Disputes over
property are common but infighting is rare. Instead, skulks steal
from one another at the first opportunity.

All monsters who hunt humans and demihumans hunt skulks,
but their camouflage ability makes skulks difficult prey. Skulks
are despised by intelligent creatures; any skulk captured by a de-
mihuman or human community is dealt with in the harshest man-
ner allowable—usually death.
Snail

 

      

# 4

  

a “
Lesh)

 

 

 

 

Fiail Sea
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any/Subterranean Any/Large bodies
of salt water
FREQUENCY: Very rare Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night Any
DIET: Herbivore Herbivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7) Animal (1)
TREASURE: Nil Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1 1
ARMOR CLASS: 4 (see below) 6 (see below)
MOVEMENT: 3 3
HIT DICE: 4-6 12
THACO: 4 HD: 17 9
5-6 HD: 15
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 per tentacle 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-8 2-16
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil Nil
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below Paralysis (see
below)
MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below Nil
SIZE: L (8' tall) H (15' tall, 20’
long)
MORALE: Elite (13-14) Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 975 10,000

Flail snails are silicon-based gastropods distantly related to ordi-
nary garden snails. Their shells average eight feet high at the
crown and are masses of neon blues, reds, greens, and yellows.
Flail snails get their name from the four to six club-like tentacles
that grow from their heads. Each tentacle ends in a ten-pound
mass of hardened flesh covered with knobs. Short sensor tenta-
cles grow from either side of the head. These sensors detect mo-
tion up to 20 feet away. Their flesh is rubbery and gray-blue in
color.

Combat: A hit by a single tentacle causes 1d8 points of damage
and can smash a one-inch-thick piece of wood. A four-tentacled
snail makes four attacks as a 4 Hit Die creature, a three-tentacled
snail makes three attacks as a 3 Hit Die creature, and so on. These
attacks may be against one or two opponents. Both opponents
must be in front of or to the side of the snail.

Flail snail tentacles have 1 Hit Die apiece. Treat each tentacle as
a separate creature. When a tentacle is reduced to 0 hit points it is
useless, Flail snails attack until all of their tentacles are dead.
Once this happens the monster withdraws into its shell and dies
1d3 turns later. During these turns the snail utters pitiful cries that
are 50% likely per turn to attract a wandering monster.

The body has hit points equal to the combined total of all the
tentacles, but it is nearly impossible to attack because it is pro-
tected by the creature's shell, The effective Armor Class of the
body is —8.

Flail snails are protected against magic by their colorful shell.
Whenever the snail is attacked by magic, the effects are
variable—40% chance of the spell malfunctioning, 30% chance
of it Functioning normally, 20% chance of it failing to work at all,
and a 10% chance that the spell is reflected back at the spellcaster.
A spell that malfunctions has its effect altered slightly (DM dis-
cretion). The altered spell then affects the creature nearest the
snail (saving throw if applicable).

Flail snails are immune to fire and poison, but they shun bright

light.
Habitat/Society: Flail snails live peaceful lives crawling up and

 

 

 

 

 

down dungeon and cavern corridors. Normally quiet, flail snails
aggressively defend themselves, chasing attackers until they
withdraw from the snail's 20-foot sensing range.

Ecology: Flail snails live off lichen and algae growing on
dungeon floors. Glands in their mouth secrete a substance that
loosens the plants. The mouth then scrapes up the loosened
plants.

Females give live birth to 1d3 young. The young remain with
the mother for two years, until their tentacle knobs reach a
weight of five pounds. Flail snails mature at age four and live up
to 20 years. These peaceful beasts are frequently hunted for their
shells. A single shell weighs 250 to 300 pounds and retains its
magical powers for 1d6 months after the occupant’s death. A
skilled armorer can try to fashion 1-2+2 shields from a single
shell. These shields affect spells as did the original shell until their
magic fades (1d6 months). After the magic fades, the shields be-
come nonmagical +2 shields. In addition, freshly ground snail
shell is needed to create a robe of scintillating colors. One robe
may be made from a single shell. Shells sell for 5,000 gold pieces
on the open market.

Sea Snail

These behemoths of the deep measure up to 20 feet in length. Sea
snails are a variety of giant conch. Their skins are rubbery (AC
6), but their shells are incredibly thick (AC —4).

Sea snails live in all seas and oceans. Their shells vary in color
from bright red to flat white with a pink interior.

Giant snails are sometimes tamed by tritons.

If attacked, sea snails withdraw into their shell and release a vi-
cious neurotoxin into the surrounding water. This poison aftects
all creatures within 20 feet, paralyzing them for 1d6 hours unless
they roll successful saving throws vs. poison witha —3 penalty. If
the attack continues, the sea snail will wail. The round following
the wail, 1d10 charmed tritons arrive. Each round thereafter 1d10
more tritons arrive until a total of 50 are on the scene. These tri-
tons fight to the death in defense of the sea snail.

The value of the snail's shell depends on the shell quality. The
base price is 4,000 gp, doubled for an unblemished shell.
Sprite

 

      

 

   

 

 

 

There are several races of sylvan creatures related to sprites.
Among these are the forest-dwelling atomie and grig, as well as
the sea sprites who make their homes in warm coral reefs. Each
race is detailed separately below.

Atomie

Atomies are cheerful woodland beings who live in secluded for-
ests. They avoid most serious-minded creatures, but mix freely
with the carefree grigs and are 20% likely to be found in their
company. The lightest and quickest of all the sprites, atomies
rarely surpass one foot in height. They are thin of face and body,
with twin dragonfly-like wings on their back. Atomies have elven
features, with slender, pointy ears, straight noses, and wide clear
eyes. Their skin is pale, but with a hint of woodland green. Ato-
mie clothing is innately magical,as it is bright and festive on the
one hand, while at the same time, blending well with woodland
surroundings.

Atomie senses are developed beyond that of normal folk. They
hear things at twice the range of humans; they possess infravision
out to 90 feet. Their voices are high-pitched, almost bee-like.
Atomies speak their own language and often those of sprites,
pixies, and some broken common. They can also speak with both
plants and animals.

Combat: Inbattle, atomies use their amazing speed to flit in and
out, poking and jabbing at their enemy. Atomies attack as 3rd-
level fighters.

Twenty percent of atomies encountered are armed with tiny
crossbows and spears. Atomie crossbows have a 30-foot range
and inflict 1d3 points of damage. Atomie spears cause 1d4 points
of damage. The remaining atomies are armed with either spears
(40%) or tiny swords (40% ). Treat atomie swords as daggers that
cause 1d3 points of damage. Atomies have the following spell-
like abilities: blink, invisibility, pass plant, speak with animals,
and summon insects. These abilities can be used at will, one per

round, at Sth-level ability.
 Atomies are only 10% likely to be surprised and 90% likely to
surprise. Upon hearing an intruder, atomies disappear and try to
lure the intruder away using false lights, chattering voices, and
pesky summoned insects. Repeat intruders are warned with a
well-placed crossbow bolt. If combat is inevitable, or the in-
truders are orcs, the atomies regroup and attack in a group. If sur-

 

| qed TSR

a I Se ST eS a a

Atomie Grig Sea
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate/ Forests Temperate / Forests Tropical /Coral reefs
FREQUENCY: Rare Very rare Rare
ORGANIZATION: Tribe Band Community
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night Night Day
DIET: Herbivore Herbivore Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average to very (8-12) Low to average (5-10) Very (11-12)
TREASURE: M (X) M (Xx, Y) (D)
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral Neutral (good) Chaotic neutral
NO. APPEARING: 30-120 2-12 5-40
ARMOR CLASS: 4 2 6
MOVEMENT: 12, Fl 24 (A) 6, Leap 12 6, Sw 24
HIT DICE: 1/2 t/a +1 1
THACO: 20 20 19
NO, OF ATTACKS: 2 3or2 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: By weapon type (see below)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below See below Spell use
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below See below Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 20% 30% 5%
SIZE: T (1' tall) T (17/2' tall) T (2° tall)
MORALE: Steady (11-12) Steady (11-12) Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 175 175 175

prise is achieved, the atomies with spears (60% of the force) fly in
and dive on their opponents (usually aiming at their rears). Div-
ing attacks inflict double damage (2d4).

Habitat/Society: Atomies live in the upper branches of old
hardwood trees (usually oaks), one family per tree. Each family
hollows out a series of tiny rooms from their tree, decorating each
room with walnut chairs, woven pine-needle rugs, acorn dishes,
and the like. A winding network of balconies, landings, and
sturdy rope bridges connects the community together, forming a
village high above the forest floor. A typical atomie village
houses 3d4x10 adults and 4d6 children.

At night, atomies issue forth from their tree village, flitting
about in the moonlight, playing songs and games, gathering nuts
and berries, and dancing on the forest floor. Atomies almost
never bother with outsiders, including sprites (whom they view
as tedious and overly serious), but they occasionally help a child
in distress, A rescued child is well cared for and entertained be-
fore being returned to the outside world.

The concept of pets is unknown, but atomies often grow mush-
room “friends” in their living rooms.

Atomie leadership is loose and unclear. A chieftain exists, but
he is seems to be chosen for storytelling and singing ability more
than anything else,

Ecology: Atomies are strict herbivores and find the eating
habits of their sprite cousins repulsive. They favor nuts above
fruit, but prefer honey when they can convince (i.e., trick) bees
into giving them some.

Atomies make a perfect bite-sized morsels for most creatures,
and sometimes fall prey to evil animals, such as worgs. Good-
aligned animals never hunt atomies.

Atomies have no known life span limit. They never grow ill or
old (though a few are slightly greyer and wiser than others). It is
believed that the only way for an atomie to die is through acci-
dents or combat.

Atomies view magic as something connected with life and are
fascinated by inanimate objects that possess magic. Thus, ato-
mies collect magical items, hoarding them as curios and promi-
nently displaying them in their homes or, if the items are too
large, hiding them in the boles of large trees. Nonmagical trea-
sures are considered unnecessary clutter and are either thrown
away or given to forest creatures who value such things.
Sprite

 

Grig

Grigs are mischievous, lighthearted relatives of sprites. They
have no fear of big people and take great joy in playing tricks
upon them.

Grigs have a bizarre appearance. Their head, torso, and arms
are those of sprites, while their legs and tiny wings are those of
crickets. These legs, combined with their wings, give grig tremen-
dous leaping ability. Their heads are sprite-like, but two antennae
grow from their forehead. Grigs have light blue skin, forest green
hair, and brown hairy legs. They usually wear tunics or brightly
colored vests with buttons made from tiny gems. Grigs speak ato-
mie, brownie, pixie, sprite, and common. They have double the
normal hearing range and powerful infravision (180-foot range).

Combat: Fierce (by sprite standards), each grig carries six small
darts and a tiny short sword. Darts thrown by grigs gain a +2 bo-
nus to the attack roll. Damage is as a normal dart when thrown
by grigs, but only 1 point when thrown by non-grigs. Likewise,
their short swords inflict normal damage when used by grigs, and
only 1 point of damage when used by non-grigs.

Grigs have the following spell-like abilities: change self, entan-
gle, invisibility, pyrotechnics, trip, and ventriloquism, Each may
be used at will, one per round, at 6th-level ability.

Grigs move with absolute silence in woodlands, surprising op-
ponents 90% of the time and being surprised only 10% of the
time. Grigs avoid strangers whenever possible, or, if necessary,
divert the intruders with their magical abilities. Evil or malicious
creatures are attacked with surprise, with half the grigs springing
onto the intruders while the other grigs pelt the opponents’ faces
with a volley of darts. In addition, one grig fiddler (grigs never go
anywhere without a fiddle), plays a song that is 25% likely to
have the same effect as Otto's Irresistible Dance. If successfully
played, all non-sprites within 30 feet of the fiddler must dance un-
til the grig ceases playing (successful saving throw negates ef-
fects), or until they drop from exhaustion. Grigs can play for
hours.

Habitat/Society: Grigs roam the forests in small bands. They
have no permanent homes but often sleep in the limbs of treants,
or near unicorns (who protect grigs even unto death).

Grigs love to sing and dance, joining atomies in their nightly
forays. If one grig band in encountered there is a 30% chance of
additional grigs or atomies (out of the 30%: 1%-15% = 5d10
grigs, 16%-25% = 1d12 grigs and 3d4x10 atomies, 26%-30% =
5d10 grig and 3d4x10 atomies). Grigs are cautious but trusting.
They delight in pulling pranks on big people. Common ploys in-
clude stealing someone's food (while he eats), collapsing a tent,
and using ventriloquism to make inanimate objects talk. Once a
prank is set, the grigs sit back and watch, breaking out into laugh-
ter when the unfortunate person is fooled. People whom grigs
find funny (i.e., who make complete fools of themselves) are apt
to be plagued by harmless jokes until they reach the forest edge.
At that point, one of the grigs shows himself and make amends
with a gift. This gift is either a harmless bauble such as a 1d6x100-
gp gem (25%) or a precious jar of really fresh honey (75%).

Ecology: Grigs live on nuts, berries and honey, like their atomie
cousins.

The origin of grigs remains a mystery. Grigs apparently never
grow old, but neither do they seem to reproduce. No grig children
have ever been sighted.

Sea Sprites

These sprite-kin make their homes on colorful coral reefs. There
they live in harmony with the sea creatures, protecting the reefs’
delicate environment and frolicking in the waves.

Sea sprites have fine, cheerful faces, with rounded cheeks and
wide, fish-like eyes. Their hair is the color and texture of sea-
weed, and stretches down to their neck gills. These gills enable sea
sprites to breathe either air or water. Their skin is light blue,
smooth, and slick to the touch. Sea sprites have no wings, but
webbing grows between their toes and fingers. Sea sprites wear
brightly colored eel-skin jerkins, and often adorn themselves with
delicate ornaments crafted from treasures found in the ocean.

Combat: All sea sprites carry tiny, razor-sharp swords. In addi-
tion, 50% of the sea sprites encountered are equipped with special
crossbows. In the hands of sea sprites, these crossbows function
like normal crossbows both above and below water. Sea sprites
coat their crossbow bolts with a substance that cause any creature
struck to fall into a comatose sleep for 1d6 hours (saving throws
vs. poison apply). Evil creatures (particularly sahuagin whom sea
sprites both fear and hate) are slain, neutral and good creatures
are taken to a locale well away from the reef the sea sprites in-
habit. Air breathers are left on a nearby beach provided they nei-
ther harmed nor attempted to harm the coral reef.

Sea sprites have the spell-like abilities to turn invisible at will
and detect good/evil. Three times per day a sea sprite may cast
slow, by touch. This spell is cast at 5th level of ability. Once per
day a sea sprite can cast airy water at 10th level of ability.

Encountered sea sprites are 45% likely to be accompanied by
1dé6 large carnivorous fish, such as barracudas. These fish func-
tion as guards and pets, and they attack any creature threatening
the sprites.

Habitat/Society: Sea sprites live in the natural caves of coral
reefs, or amid large wrecks. Their homes are cheerfully decorated
with a mishmash of natural shells, bones, pearls, free-swimming
colorful pet fish, and artifacts taken from sunken galleys. Sea
sprites live in small communities of four or five families. Each
community is led by the eldest male, but the true power often
rests in the hands of his mate.

Sea sprites are reclusive, shunning the company of all but their
coral neighbors. They have the ability to breathe air but rarely set
foot on land (though they sometimes frolic in the surf on moonlit
nights).

Ecology: Sea sprites are omnivorous, living off the better sea-
weeds, small crustaceans, and fish. Sea sprites practice fish hus-
bandry and thus never deplete the reefs where they live. The only
natural enemies of sea sprites are sahuagin, but the sprites’ natu-
ral abilities and speed make them difficult prey. Sea sprites live
1,200 years on average. They sometimes trade with sea elves but
never mix socially.
Taer

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Arctic and subarctic/Mountains
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Clan

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: . Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: Nil (see below)
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 10-40

ARMOR CLASS: 4

MOVEMENT: 18

HIT DICE: 3+6

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3or1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6/1-4/1-4 or by weapon +3
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Odor (see below)
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (6?/2’ tall)
MORALE: Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 270

Taer are a race of shaggy humanoids that live in cold mountain re-
gions. Taer look like a cross between cave men and apes. Their
bodies are thick and barrel-chested. Long, powerful arms reach
down to their ankles, ending in great wide hands. Thick, oily,
matted fur, snow-white to grey in color, covers their entire body.
The head is large but has virtually no forehead, Like many snow-
creatures, taer possess a second transparent eyelid that enables
them to see clearly even in heavy snowstorms without risking eye
damage. Tear speak a crude language that consists of guttural
grunts and body slapping.

Combat: Most taer shun weapons, though a few (25%) hurl
huge stone spears before closing to melee. Any spear hurled by a
taer gains a +1 bonus to the attack roll and a +3 bonus to dam-
age, due to a taer's great strength. In melee, taer attack using
kick /punch/bite.

Taer pores excrete a fatty substance that coats their fur. The
odor of this substance is extremely vile. All creatures within ten
feet of a taer must roll a successful saving throw vs. breath
weapon or suffer disorientation and nausea for 1d4 +1 hours. At-
tacks by disoriented creatures suffer a —2 penalty to attack rolls
and a —1 penalty to damage. This same fatty substance protects
taer from cold, including magical cold.

Taer are both cunning and fierce when defending their terri-
tory. They are very knowledgeable of their home mountains and
always use this to their advantage. Common ploys include delib-
erate avalanches, hurling down rocks upon unsuspecting victims,
burrowing into the snow alongside mountain trails, and covering
a crevice in the mountainside with snow to create a pit trap.

Habitat/Society: Taer live in nomadic clans that consist several
interrelated families. These clans number 10d4 individuals. The
clans skirt the edges of high mountain ranges, moving back and
forth two to three miles a day within a predetermined territory.

During daylight hours, adult male and female taer venture
down the slopes to the bottom of the snow line to search for food.
Taer’s gather and eat just about anything, including lichen, grubs,
seeds, tree bark, bird eggs, and mountain goats. Taer never hunt

 

 

 

 

 

humans or demihumans for food, preferring to drive off intelli-
gent creatures with a show of strength and much hooting and hol-
lering.

Taer are superstitious by nature, distrusting iron and metal.
They avoid any creatures who wear cloth to keep warm, appar-
ently attaching some supernatural significance to the presence of
outer clothing. Taer worship their own guardian snow-god, ask-
ing for good hunting and snow to hide within. Clans carry a
crudely fashioned stone guardian idol to protect them. Taer be-
lieve the size of the statue relates to the magical protection be-
stowed upon them. Some guardian statues weigh as much as
2,500 pounds and require several male taer to lift.

Taer have no lairs, per se, sleeping at night within deep snow
banks or among rocky outcroppings. Before the gatherers leave
each morning, the nursing females, young, and guardian statue
are placed inside the nearest available cave. The adults then cam-
ouflage the entrance to the nursery with rocks, snow, and ice,
Outside the eldest male hides himself. This male will try to dis-
tract any creature coming within 20 feet of the nursery during the
day. Any attempt to open the nursery causes the male to charge.
When defending the nursery, the eldest male gains a +2 bonus to
his attack roll and +2 additional damage. His attack is designed
to hurt and scare off the intruders more than to kill.

Even when a taer has a human or demihuman disoriented, the
taer is more likely to leave the intruder injured and unconscious
than to actually slay him.

Ecology: Taer adorn themselves with polished teeth and horns
but keep no real treasure. Clans sometimes (25%) carry a single
metal item taken from an unfortunate traveler. The item is 10%
likely to be a magical weapon. The item is always wrapped in
leather so that the taer do not have to touch it directly. Carrying
this metal has religious significance for taer as a protection
against metal-using humans. Taer fear humans because the crea-
tures are sometimes hunted for their glands that secrete the oily
substance in their fur. These are worth 500 gold pieces on the
open market and can be used to fashion a protection from cold
potion.
Tentamort

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any/ Subterranean
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Nest

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Non- (0)
TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1-10

ARMOR CLASS: 3 (tentacles)/1 (body)
MOVEMENT: 1

HIT DICE: 2 each tentacle, 4 body
THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: S (but tentacles 10’ long)
MORALE: Average (8-10)
XP VALUE: 650

Tentamorts are dungeon predators distantly related to sea squids.
Their head/body is a flesh sphere two feet in diameter, covered
by a chitinous shell. This head/body contains all the vital organs
as well as the sense organs—smell, taste, and hearing. At the bot-
tom of the body are six to eight short suction-cup covered tenta-
cles. These serve as feet and enable the tentamort to attach itself
firmly to almost any surface. The feet also provide the tentamorts
with their only form of locomotion. Two larger tentacles grow
atop tentamorts. Both measure ten to 12 feet in length. Tenta-
morts have no eyes, but their head/body has a delicate organ that
senses body heat. Breathing is accomplished through three blow
holes located just above the feet. Tentamorts are gray-green in
color.

Combat: A tentamort drags itself through dungeon corridors,
using its sense of smell to find a well-traveled doorway or inter-
section. The tentamort then attaches itself to the ceiling or wall
and waits for prey, Any creature coming within ten feet of the ten-
tamort is attacked by the tentamort’s two larger tentacles. Each
tentacle has 2 Hit Dice, while the head/body has 4 Hit Dice.
When a tentacle is reduced to 0 hit points it is severed. Severed
tentacles grow back in one week's time. Severing one tentacle
does not affect the other, The only way to kill a tentamort is to de-
stroy the head/body.

Each tentacle can lash an opponent for 1d6 points of damage.
In addition, each has a special attack.

One tentacle is a powerful constrictor. This tentacle seizes its
target on a hit 2 or more above the required to hit roll (or on a nat-
ural 20). Seized victims are trapped within the constricting coils
of the tentacle. Victims cannot move their arms, cast spells, or use
weapons. They may use their natural Strength to try to break free
(successful Strength check required, with a —2 penalty). Each
round thereafter, the tentacle automatically inflicts 1d6 points of
constriction damage; no attack roll is required. The tentacle con-
tinues to constrict until the victim dies or until the tentacle is sev-
ered.

The other tentacle is much more deadly. A hollow needle of
bone, six inches long, protrudes from its end. Like the first tenta-
cle, this one seizes prey on a roll of 20 or on a hit 2 above what is
needed. This tentacle, however, does not constrict. Instead, the

 

 

 

 

round after grasping, the bone needle is inserted into the victim
(no roll required). During the next two rounds the tentamort in-
jects a saliva-like fluid into the helpless victim. This fluid softens
the victim's muscles and organs to enable them to be sucked out
through the hollow needle. If the tentacle is severed during injec-
tion, the victim can be saved by casting a cure disease spell upon
him within one hour. Creatures receiving the full two-round in-
jection die automatically three rounds later unless treated by
more powerful and immediate magic. A heal spell will negate the
fluid, as will a regenerate followed by cure wounds.

lf two victims are within reach, the tentacles attack them simul-
taneously. If only one target is available, both arms attack it.

Tentamorts respond to very basic stimuli. They withdraw rap-
idly from fire or cold. Unless very hungry, tentamorts quit attack-
ing after losing one tentacle.

Habitat/Society: Tentamorts live in both dungeons and dismal
swamps. In dungeon settings they clump together in nests of 1d10
around a single entrance or tunnel bend. In swamps they usually
spread out more, with individuals wrapping their feet around
trees and then mixing their tentacles in with the water and muck.
Tentamorts, like earthworms, are both male and female. When
two tentamorts mate, both give birth to clusters of oftspring,
each two to three pounds in weight.

Ecology: The body of a tentamort is little more than a huge
hunk of flesh. They are frequently hunted by goblins, orcs and
other intelligent creatures. They kill tentamorts by standing out
of their reach and firing arrows into them. To avoid this, tenta-
morts sometimes crawl back into crevices, attacking with their
tentacles while protecting their vulnerable head/body.

The poison glands of a tentamort sell for 10d4 gold pieces.
From a single tentamort a skilled alchemist can make 1d3 doses of
a deadly, tasteless, odorless poison. When consumed, this poison
causes a slow disintegration of the victim's internal organs. The
victim loses 1 hit point the first day, 2 the second, and so on. Vic-
tims cannot be healed (even magically) until a neutralize poison is
cast on them. Untreated victims eventually die from massive in-
ternal bleeding. This poison is favored by assassins, especially
those who like to be miles away when their victim dies.
Turtle

 

 

 

 

 

 

Sea, Giant Snapping, Giant

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any/Sea or ocean Any/Lake or large
Tver

FREQUENCY: Uncommon Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Solitary Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any
DIET: Omnivore Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Non- (0) Non- (0)
TREASURE: Nil Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1-3 1-4
ARMOR CLASS: 2/5 0/5
MOVEMENT: 1, Sw 15 3, Sw 2
HIT DICE: 15 10
THACO: 5 11
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 4-16 6-24
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil Long neck
SPECIAL DEFENSES: — Hide limbs Hide limbs
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil Nil
SIZE: G (50' diam.) G (40' diam.)
MORALE: Champion (15-16) Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 5,000 3,000

Giant turtles are simply huge varieties of the normal variety en-
countered daily in the wild. They resemble their common coun-
terparts in every respect except for size.

A turtle is characterized by its bony, outer shell. The lower por-
tion of the shell is known as the plastron, while the upper shell is
referred to as the carapace. It is within this shell that a turtle with-
draws its arms, legs, and head when threatened. Some turtles are
incapable of completely shielding their limbs in this way, and
plaster their arms and legs very close to the shell for protection.

Giant turtles eat whatever is available in their environment,
from living plants to all sizes of insects, small mammals, and fish
of all kinds. They prefer fresh green plants and live worms, as tur-
tles do not enjoy feeding on carrion or rotting vegetation. Natu-
rally, such foods are fair game if the turtle is in great danger of
starvation.

Turtles have very long life spans—from 30-150 years depending
on the species. They are slow moving and thus would rather with-
draw into their shells when faced with an enemy, rather than ei-
ther fight or flee. However, when harmed or persistently
molested, the strong, quick bite of a giant turtle is a deadly
weapon indeed.

Giant turtle meat is considered a delicacy in most cultures, and
it is highly nourishing and palatable, The upper shells of giant
turtles are also greatly prized, as they can be made into small
huts, strong roofs, or even boats. Without exception, the tropi-
cal, marine varieties of sea turtles are the finest tasting and have
the most attractive shells.

Giant Sea Turtles

These basically non-aggressive marine creatures fight fiercely if
annoyed or threatened. The tearing bite of giant sea turtles

 

 

 

 

 

causes 4d4 points of damage to the unlucky victim. lf they surtace
beneath a small craft, there is a possibility of upsetting the vessel.
There is a 90% chance for a rowboat but only 10% for a typical
drakkar. Adjust this base chance for other sea-going vessels ac-
cording to the size and stability of the craft.

The head and flippers of giant sea turtles are AC 5, while the
shell has an AC of 2. If the turtle withdraws its head and flippers
into its shell housing, either for defense or while resting, all at-
tacks are considered to be directed against the shell (i.e., AC 2).

Giant Snapping Turtles

Feared greatly for their voracious appetite and aggressiveness, gi-
ant snapping turtles are found only in large lakes and rivers.
Many myths about lake monsters were born out of sightings of
these relatively common freshwater creatures.

They lurk near shore or on the bottom, as they do not swim
quickly. There they remain motionless, thus causing a —3 penalty
to opponents’ surprise rolls. They then shoot forth their long
necks (up to ten feet away) to grab their prey. Once a victim is bit-
ten (for 6d4 points of damage), he is invariably grabbed by the
powerful jaws. Only a successful bend bars/lift gates roll frees
one from the vicious mouth, as spells cannot be cast or weapons
used at these times. Meanwhile, bite damage is automatic on each
round while grabbed. When the victim goes unconscious, the gi-
ant snapping turtle throws back its head, gently tossing the victim
into the air a few feet, then down into the open gullet of the beast.

The lightly plated heads and limbs of these monsters are AC 5
when extended, but the shell affords AC 0 protection to the body,
and to the limbs if retracted.
Tyrg

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any/Mountains or hilly forests
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Pack
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: ¢
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1-10
ARMOR CLASS: 5
MOVEMENT: 18
HIT DICE: 5-8
THACO: 5-6 HD: 15
7-8 HD: 13
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-12
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Stunning howl, paw rake

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: L (6'-9' long)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 5 HD: 270

6 HD: 420

7 HD: 650

8 HD: 975

The tyrg is a cross between a dog (in watchfulness) and a tiger (in
stalking ability).

A tyrg stands three feet tall at the shoulder and varies in length
from six to nine feet. [ts overall coloring is white with gray, black,
and tan splotches. The tyrg’s sleek stance while hunting is remi-
niscent of a cat, but its powerful jaws, containing many fangs,
demonstrates its relation to the world’s dogs.

Combat: When tyrgs engage prey in melee, they emit fierce
howls that serve to mildly stun their victims (+2 penalty to initia-
tive, —2 penalty to attack rolls) for the following three rounds.
There is no saving throw for these howls. Note that the effects of
this stunning are not cumulative, and only after the first three
rounds of stunning have worn off can those affected be stunned
again. After howling, tyrgs attack. Their powerful jaws full of
massive teeth cause 1d12 points of damage with every vicious
bite. If an opponent is overborne, or otherwise finds himself
prone on the ground, the tyrg's raking forepaws can inflict 1d4
points each on the already besieged victim.

Tyrgs can move silently 75% of the time and are surprised only
on a roll of 1 due to their superior senses.

Habitat/Society: Little is known about tyrgs, as they have been
encountered only relatively recently. What has been gathered has
been from wholly unreliable observation carried out by com-
pletely inexperienced information gatherers (i.e., adventurers).
Tyrgs have been reportedly sighted in roving packs, leading one
to believe they lean heavily to the wild dog branch of their ances-
try. However, the few lairs that have been breached successfully
tend to support the idea that the female tyrgs do the majority of

 

 

 

 

 

 

the hunting. This observation tends to suggest the pride-like na-
ture of tigers and lions.

Combining the two observations is difficult, but a suitable hy-
pothesis has been proposed. Pending verification by trustworthy
sources, it is believed that tyrgs travel in roving, almost nomadic,
packs across the wilderness. Every few seasons, or perhaps years,
the current lair is abandoned, and the pack moves on (under the
leading male's guidance), However, when the pack is stationary,
having chosen a suitable lair, the tyrgs settle back and form a new
pride.

Females, after giving birth to their young, forage out to seek
food. The males remain behind, guarding the lair and the young,
and proceeding to test the strength and power of the other males,
thereby reestablishing or reorganizing the ruling hierarchy.

If tyrgs are encountered in their lair (usually a cave or deep hole
in the ground), there are 1d4 young present (20-70% grown).
These fight with the adults to preserve the lair. All others in the
lair are adults.

Ecology: Itis important to note that the sexes cannot yet be told
apart from afar, because of a lack of general knowledge regarding
these hounds. Coloration notes or behavioral anecdotes might
provide a clue.

Otherwise, tyrgs are straight-forward predatory carnivores.
They have no natural enemies, other than monsters even nastier
and hungrier than they are, and have no natural allies. Even re-
lated species, like wild dogs and tigers, are dealt with on a case-
by-case basis, meaning that sometimes they are greeted,
sometimes they are attacked. Again, no obvious behavioral pat-
terns have been observed.
Wolf, Mist

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Subarctic and temperate/Non-desert
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Pack
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Lawful good
NO. APPEARING; 2-20

ARMOR CLASS: 6
MOVEMENT: 18

HIT DICE: 3+3

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 bite
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-6

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Breath weapon
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 10%

SIZE: M (4' at the shoulder)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 175

Mist wolves are cousins of normal wolves, but they are larger and
have some magical abilities. Although they're lawful good in
alignment, mankind's innate fear and hatred of wolves ensure
that these creatures are treated with distrust.

Mist wolves are almost identical to their nonmagical cousins,
except that they're taller at the shoulder and their fur is gray with
white tips on the hackles. They're slim and muscular, with
fearsome-looking teeth. Their eyes are black, without the red
tinge often seen in wild wolves.

Combat: Mist wolves attack in packs like common wolves, of-
ten using the sheer weight of numbers to drag down opponents.
They're more intelligent than their cousins, so they are less likely
to continue an obviously losing battle.

Mist wolves have a magical ability that makes it easier for them
to disengage from stronger opponents. Each mist wolf can exhale
clouds of thick mist (similar to a wall of fog spell) blocking all vi-
sion, filling a volume ten feet on a side (1,000 cubic feet) and last-
ing five rounds unless blown away. The mist is purely defensive,
since it's as opaque to the wolves as it is to their opponents, This
ability can be used twice per day.

Mist wolves have an innate ability to detect evil. This power
operates continuously, without conscious volition. They're im-
placable enemies of evil and defenders of goodness and law.
They'll often go to great lengths—even giving up their lives—to
protect humans and demihumans.

Habitat/Society: Because of their alignment, mist wolves attack
only humans or demihumans who have been acting in a fla-
grantly evil manner. Normally, mist wolves protect travelers
from evil creatures that may wish them harm. Unfortunately, fear
and hatred of wolves are taught from the cradle and are embodied

 

 

ft
in everything from children's tales to common expressions (“a
wolf in the fold,” “the wolf at the door,” etc.), The fact that mist
wolves are frequently seen where evil is abroad doesn’t help; peo-
ple never realize—or refuse to believe—that the wolves only ap-
pear when evil is near in order to fight it. Therefore, mist wolves
are often slain by the very people they're trying to protect.

Mist wolf society is based around the pack, Packs consist of up
to 20 adult wolves, with an equal numbers of males and females.
The leader of the pack is the strongest individual (usually male,
but not necessarily so), who gains and defends the position by
challenge and non-lethal combat.

Mist wolves have their own rich language consisting of yips,
barks, and growls. They understand the common tongue, but
they are unable to speak it for anatomical reasons.

These creatures are most common in forests with evil reputa-
tions, because that's where they can do the most good. (Of
course, this doesn't help the wolves’ reputation at all. . . .) There
are large populations of mist wolves in Dreadwood and in the
Burneal Forest, although they aren't limited to these areas.

 

 

 

 

Ecology: If a pack of mist wolves is encountered in its own terri-
tory (usually wilderness forests), there are half as many cubs
present as there are females in the pack. Mist wolves are monoga-
mous and mate for life, and both parents share the responsibility
of caring for cubs, Cubs grow rapidly, reaching full maturity at
the age of 12 months. They gain their breath weapon ability at
half that age.

Mist wolves are highly efficient predators with few natural ene-
mies. They're intelligent enough to select their victims and con-
trol their hunting with care, making sure never to over-hunt an
area.
Wraith

 

 

 

 

 

Swordwraith Soul Beckoner
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any/Old Any/Subterranean
battlegrounds
FREQUENCY: Rare Rare
ORGANIZATION: Military unit Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night Any
DIET: Nil Life energy
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10) High (13-14)
TREASURE: Incidental E
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil Neutral evil
NO, APPEARING: 2-8 1
ARMOR CLASS: 3 2
MOVEMENT: 9 6
HIT DICE: 7 Variable (4 +)
THACO: 13 Variable
NO. OF ATTACKS: 3/2 (as F7) 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-10 1-6/1-6 ©
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Strength drain Eerie whisper
SPECIAL DEFENSES: +2 or better to hit +1 or better to hit
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil Nil
SIZE: M (6' tall) M (6' tall)
MORALE: Fearless (19-20) Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: 650 Variable
Swordwraith

Swordwraiths are the spirits of warriors cut down during battle
and kept from the dissolution of death by their indomitable wills.

Only seen at night, or underground where the sun never shines,
swordwraiths appear as warriors. Although the armor and weap-
ons are unremarkable, the flesh within appears insubstantial. Un-
der certain lighting conditions, all that can be seen are two
glowing eyes.

Combat: Swordwraiths, when they were alive, were hardened
warriors; as undead, they retain their knowledge of strategy and
tactics. They speak the common tongue and might parlay with
someone they consider their military equal. Swordwraiths attack
as normal warriors. No matter what weapon is used, the damage
is 1d10 points. Each hit also drains 1 point of Strength from the
victim. If a victim's Strength reaches 0, he dies. Strength lost to a
swordwraith’'s attack can only be regained by complete rest (1
point per day of total inactivity), or through a wish, limited wish,
or equally potent magic.

Swordwraiths can be harmed only by weapons of +2 or better
enchantment. They are immune to sleep, charm, and other mind-
affecting magic. They are turned by priests as if they were vam-
pires.

Habitat/Society: Swordwraiths were once professional soldiers
for whom fighting was all there was in life. In many cases, they
are too stubborn to even admit that they are dead.

These creatures are active only in the absence of sunlight. Their
bodies were typically interred in barrows or burial mounds, Dur-
ing daylight hours, intruders into such barrows may meet
swordwraiths preparing for their nocturnal activities.

Swordwraiths congregate in small units, planning and execut-
ing midnight raids on nearby settlements. They are also likely to
attack any traveling party unwise enough to spend the night
within their territory. Swordwraiths gather no loot and occupy
no territory; they fight because fighting is all they know.

Swordwraiths are common in the Stark Mounds region—
probably as a result of ancient territorial wars between Geoff and
Sterich, or their forebears—but they can be found in any other
parts of the world that boast old battlefields and war graves.

 

 

 

 

 

Ecology: Swordwraiths consume and produce nothing. Their
victims are travelers and nearby settlers.

Soul Beckoner

Soul beckoners resemble shadows more than wraiths, being 90%
undetectable unless seen in bright light. However, as soul beck-
oners drain energy levels, they take on the features of their vic-
tims, coming to resemble them in form.

Combat: When a victim isin range (see below), a soul beckoner
lures him with whispers. Characters hearing the whispers must
roll a successful saving throw vs. spell (Wisdom bonuses apply)
or be drawn toward the creature. A successful saving throw ne-
gates the whisper and results in the character hearing an eerie
wailing sound. The character must then roll another successful
saving throw vs. spell or flee in terror for 1d4+1 rounds. Crea-
tures drawn to a soul beckoner are attacked by the monster with a
+4 bonus to its attack roll, but a successful hit breaks the en-
chantment of the whisper. Otherwise, victims are allowed a sav-
ing throw every round to escape the creature's enchantment with
a cumulative bonus of +2 per round. A silence spell or a charac-
ter incapable of hearing (i.e., deaf, ear plugs, etc.) prevents the ef-
fects of both the whisper and the wail.

This creature physically attacks with two claws, causing 1d6
points of damage each and also draining one energy level with
each successful attack. When first encountered, a soul beckoner
has 4 Hit Dice. However, for each energy level that it drains, it be-
comes 1 Hit Die stronger, gaining the extra hit points and THACO
appropriate to its new Hit Dice, Therefore, in one round the mon-
ster is capable of draining up to two energy levels and gaining 2
HD and the extra hit points. A soul beckoner is turned by priests
as an undead according to its current Hit Dice.

Habitat/Society: The solitary soul beckoner is normally found
underground, where it waits for prey to come within 240 feet.

Ecology: The soul beckoner is simply a form of wraith that is
more in tune with its previous living form, and thus has a stronger
tie to the Prime Material plane than usual.
Zombie, Sea

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any/Shallow waters
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Pack
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Scavenger
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: M
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 2-24

ARMOR CLASS: 7
MOVEMENT: 6, Sw 12

HIT DICE: 5

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-10

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Stench, disease, spell use
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Spell immunity
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (6' tall)
MORALE: Fearless (19-20)
XP VALUE: 420

Sea zombies (also known as drowned ones) are the animated
corpses of humans who died at sea. Although similar to land-
dwelling zombies, they are free-willed and are rumored to be ani-
mated by the will of the god Nerull the Reaper.

The appearance of drowned ones matches their name: They
look like human corpses that have been underwater for some
time—bloated and discolored flesh dripping with foul water,
empty eye-sockets, tongue frequently protruding from between
blackened lips. Their visage and their stench of decay are so dis-
gusting that anyone seeing a drowned one or coming within 20
feet must roll a saving throw vs. poison, A failed saving throw in-
dicates that the character is nauseated, suffering a —1 penalty to
his attack roll and a +1 penalty to his AC for 2d4 rounds. On
land, drowned ones move slowly, with a clumsy shambling gait.
In water, however, they can swim with frightening speed.

Combat: Like most undead, drowned ones have an abiding ha-
tred for the living and attack them at any opportunity. These at-
tacks often show surprising cunning (for example, luring ships
onto the rocks and attacking the sailors as they try to save them-
selves from the wreck). Drowned ones take advantage of their
swimming speed by attacking ships as they lie at anchor—
climbing aboard the vessel and trying to drive the sailors over-
board, where they can deal with them more easily.

Drowned ones attack with the weapons typical of sailors: short
swords, daggers, hooks, clubs, etc. Because of the unnatural
strength of the creatures, these weapons all inflict 1d10 points of
damage. The putrid water that drips from the drowned ones con-
tains many bacteria, so any successful hit has a 10% chance of
causing a severe blood disease in the victim. The water-logged
condition of the creature's flesh means that fire and fire-based
magic cause only half damage. Lightning, electrical, and cold-
based attacks inflict double damage. Drowned ones are immune
to sleep, charm, illusion, and other mind-altering spells. Because
they are created by the direct will of a deity, they cannot be turned
like other undead.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Many of the humans who become drowned ones were priests
while alive, and they retain their powers as undead. There is a
50% chance that each drowned one encountered is a priest of
level 1d4. These creatures are granted their spells directly from
Nerull; they receive only baneful spells.

Habitat/Society: Drowned ones congregate in loose packs.
Their only motivation is hatred for the living. Being undead, they
have no need to eat, although they sometimes rend and chew the
flesh of their prey (this is probably just to strike terror in others).
Underwater, drowned ones are active around the clock and are
often found in the sunken wrecks of the ships in which they
drowned. They are only active above the surface during the
hours of night. Drowned ones normally stray no more than 100
yards from the water. If the wind drives the fog onto the coast,
however, they can roam inland as far as the fog reaches, When
the fog retreats, or when the sun is about to rise, they must return
to the water. Dwellers on foggy coastlines usually fear the fog, al-
though they might not know why; in some areas (for example,
the Amedio coastline), sacrifices are often cast into the fogs when
they roll inland, in the hopes that the drowned ones take the of-
ferings and leave everyone else alone.

Drowned ones communicate among themselves by a form of
telepathy; they have no need of a spoken language (other than for
spellcasting). The verbal components for spells are spoken in un-
intelligible whispers.

Perhaps because the Azure Sea provides a steady supply of raw
materials (in the form of Amedio pirates and freebooters in gen-
eral), drowned ones are most common in the shallows of this
body of water. The waters around Flotsam and Jetsam Islands,
Fairwind Isle, and the Olman Islands are prime “breeding
grounds” for these hideous creatures.

Ecology: Drowned ones consume and produce nothing. They
interact among themselves only to make their killing more effi-
cient,
 

   

Zygom .

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any/Land

FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Human tissue
INTELLIGENCE: Non- (0)

TREASURE: Incidental (or host's possessions)
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil

NO. APPEARING: 1-3

ARMOR CLASS: 6

MOVEMENT: 1 (or host's movement)
HIT DICE: 3 (or host's HD)
THACO: 17 (or host's THACO)
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 (or host's attacks)
DAMAGE/ATTACK: Special (or host's weapon)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Milky glue

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: 1/e-1/a' per growth (or by host's size)
MORALE: Special
XP VALUE: 120

Zygoms are small, individual fungoid growths that consist of a
short, thin stem with an ovoid cap. One or two dozen such
growths are joined by a rhizome structure to form a singular com-
muna] creature, a zygom.

Combat: The zygem does not attack, per se. Whenever a col-
ony of zygoms Comes in rough contact with any creature, there is
a 1in 6 chance that the pale blue “milk” of a broken cap sticks fast
to the creature. This milk is extremely sticky, and has the power
to glue materials together for 1d4+1 days before the substance
dries and crumbles. Zygom glue can be otherwise embarrassing,
for it can stick weapons to targets, creatures to creatures, etc. If
glued to flesh, a colony of zygom spores will infect the creature
and begin growth by the time the glue powders, allowing the zy-
goms to infest and control the host. (For more on the conse-
quences of infestation, see “Ecology” below.)

As zygoms have fungoid intelligence that is totally alien to hu-
mans, no magic affecting the mind—beguiling, charming, domi-
nating, hypnotizing, or hold spells, etc., affects them.

Habitat/Society: Zygoms are found only near the Barrier Peaks
region for reasons that are not readily apparent. Since these
strange creatures are a strange, new form of life with an unknown
form of intelligence or social structure, it has been surmised that
zygoms are alien monstrosities that have somehow arrived here
in Greyhawk. Since they are certainly harmful and dangerous,
one might assume that they have been deliberately sent here, but
few believe this to be the case. It is believed that a true invasion,
or even a subtle assault, would require more than one drop zone
for the invaders, to account for the possibility of landing in mol-
ten lava, deep oceans, or the freezing arctic. Un-

 

 

 

 

 

doubtedly, the creatures came here accidentally. Scholars are di-
vided as to whether this is a generally good or bad thing.

Ecology: Although able to exist in the ground, zygoms prefer to
infest living flesh and nourish themselves on the host's blood and
tissue. Typical host creatures are giant ants, giant rats, large
badgers, young bears, and occasionally small humanoids
(dwarves, halflings, gnomes, and the like). Theoretically, it is
possible for a large creature (man-sized or even greater) to be-
come a host, but it might not be possible unless the foolish trav-
eler chose to Jay down on top of one of these rare alien fungi.

Infestation is typically on the head, neck and back (spinal ar-
eas). Importantly, this type of infestation controls the host crea-
ture by brain and nerve connections. The host creatures move,
attack, and defend according to the dictates of the possessing zy-
goms. This infestation leads to death in 1d8 weeks, depending on
the size and constitution of the host creature.

For example, a tiny creature, like a giant worker ant, might last
no more than a week or two, while a stout-hearted halfling war-
rior might be capable of holding out maybe six, or even seven
weeks. With luck, this might allow for enough time to reach help,
if the zygoms allow it, of course.

Note that, even after death, the zygom remains until the whole
of the dead body is consumed and only then does it move on.
Most importantly, the only known cure for a zygom infestation
(other than such rare and wondrous magic such as wish and alter
reality spells) is a cure disease spell.

Since little is known about the zygom, and even less about how
it arrived in Greyhawk, an expedition to the Barrier Peaks might
be warranted in the near future. Who knows what other alien
mysteries might be uncovered there?
Cold Region Encounters

Arctic (all terrain)

2 Pudding, white

3 Dragon, white

4 Remorhaz

5 Owl, giant

6 Snake, constrictor
7 Herd animal

8 Herd animal

9 Herd animal

10 Tribesman

11 Bear, polar

12 Blizzard or unsafe ice
13. Wolf

14 Giant, frost

15 Yeti

16 Toad, ice

17. Wolf, winter

18 Taer

19 DM Special

20 DM Special

Subarctic Forest

Treant or obliviax

Ogre mage

Bear, cave

Rat, giant

Berserker or NPC party
Tribesman

Weasel, giant or giant wolverine
Herd animal

10 Oliphant

11 Bear, brown

12 Lynx, giant or tiger

13° Wolf

14 Ogre or troll

15 Lyc. boar or giant boar
16 Owl, giant or Lyc. fox

Om oo wh

Subarctic Plain or Scrub

2 Dragon, white

3 Snake, poisonous

4 Mammoth or mastodon
5 Bear, brown

6 Berserker or NPC party
7 Tribesman

8 Tribesman

9 Herd animal

10 Herd animal

11 Oliphant

12 Wolf

13 Ogre

14 Tiger

15 Giant, frost or Lyc, bear
16 Gnoll

17 Owl, giant or giant boar
18 Remorhaz

19 DM Special

20 DM Special

Subarctic Marsh or Swamp

Dragon, mist
Dragon, white
Wolf, winter
Oliphant

Rat, giant

Wolf

Owl, giant

Gnoll

10 Gnoll or flind

11 Herd animal

12 Herd animal

13. Tribesman

14 Troll or ogre mage
15 Troll, 2-headed or ettin
16 Hydra, cryo-

sO Oo S70 tn me Gu bo

 

 

‘exe

 

Subarctic Mountains

2 Gnome or mountain dwarf
3 Dragon, white

4 Hell hound or sylph

5 Tribesman or NPC party
6 Gnoll

7? Verbeeg

8 Bear, cave

9 Herd animal

10 Ovl, giant or galeb duhr
11 Wolf

12 Ogre or ogre mage

13. Troll or 2-headed troll

14 Giant, frost

15 Wolf, winter

16 Remorhaz

17 ‘Yeti or taer

18 Lion, spotted

19 DM Special

20 DM Special

Subarctic Rough or Hills#

Dragon, white or shadow
Remorhaz

Bear, brown

Gnoll

Ow!, giant or giant rat
Bear, cave

Tribesman or NPC party
Verbeeg

10 Tiger or tyrg

11 Wolf

12 Wolf

13 Herd animal

14 Herd animal

15 Troll

16 Giant, frost

OO ain & Ww bh

 

17 Giant, frost 17 Ice toad 17 Wolf, winter
18 Troll, 2-headed 18 Ice toad 18 Hydra, cryo-
19 DM Special 19 DM Special 19 DM Special
20 DM Special 20 DM Special 20 DM Special
. Terrain Guide:
Plain: downs, heath, meadow, moor, Rough: badlands Desert: barrens, flat, waste

prairie, savanna, steppe, tundra
Scrub: brackens, brush, bush, thickets, veldt

Forest: copses, groves, jungle, rain forest,
woods

Hills: bluffs, dunes, ridges (gorge, rift,
valley, canyon)

Mountains: glacier, mesa, tor

Swamp: bog, fen, marsh, mire, morass,
quagmire, slough

Pond: lake, pool, tarn

 

Notes:

# Including ruins (cities, temples,
fortresses) within 5 miles of the party.

Monsters listed together are equally likely to
occur unless otherwise specified.

Monsters in italic type are 75% likely to be
airborne when they are encountered.

DM Special: Either choose a creature based
_ on party level, or roll randomly. A special
encounter can also be a natural hazard

(storm, avalanche) or an encounter with a
known NPC.

Gnolk: All wilderness gnoll encounters are
10% likely to be with flind.

Hobgoblin: Hobgoblin encounters are 10%
likely to be with norkers.

NPC Party: NPC parties in the wilderness
will often be near to the adventuring group
in number, level, and equipment. Otherwise
the typical NPC party will be 7th to 10th
level, with henchmen of approximately half
(round up) character level. Such parties are

90% likely to be mounted (see NPC Parties).

Ogres: All wilderness ogre encounters are
10% likely to be with ogre magi.
Temperate Encounters

Temperate Plain or Scrub

|
Heo ee ye uWe Uh

Elf, grey

Wyvern (gold dragon 10%)
Bear, brown or camprat
Spriggan

Ankheg (3-4 HD)

Jackal (jackalwere 10%)
Boar, wild (lyc. boar 10%)
Wolf or worg

Herd animal (flightless bird 10%)
Nomad or merchant
Nomad or NPC party
Horse, wild

Orc or hobgoblin

Ogre or troll

Aerial encounter

Snake, pois. or large spider
Giant, hill

DM Special

DM Special

Temperate Forest

Elf, wood (grugach 10%)
Brownie, buckawn or quickling
Lyc. tiger

Badger, giant or giant weasel
Worg or giant skunk

Owl, giant or stirge

Wolf or brown bear

Tribesman (NPC party 10%)
Needlemen

Mammal, small

Kobold or orc

Igundi or bugbear

Ogre or Woadkyn (giantkin)
Ettin or treant

Spider, giant (ettercap 10%)
Beetle, stag or slicer (10% deathwatch)
Owlbear

DM Special

DM Special

Inhabited or Patrolled Areas

Wilderness Table
Wilderness Table
Patrol

Patrol or NPC party
Pilgrim or traveller
Freeman or peasant
Freeman or peasant
Patrol

Patrol or wolf
Merchant

Merchant

Bandit

Herd animal

Orc or raider

Bear, black or gnoll
Boar, wild or berserker
Ogre

DM Special

DM Special

Temperate Rough or Hill#

Om 70 Ob wh

Wyvern or shadow dragon
Lyc. wolf or wolfwere

Bear, brown or giant badger
Ant lion

Lion, mountain

Horse or herd animal
Gnome or mountain dwarf
Tribesman (NPC party 10%)
Ore or gnoll

Hobgoblin or goblin

Wolf or worg

Bugbear or ogre

Ghoul, ghast, or wight
Aerial encounter

Spriggan

Troll

Giant, hill

DM Special

DM Special

Temperate Marsh or Swamp

Oo mo i ew

Dragon, black

Behir

Toad or frog, poisonous
Toad or frog, giant
Iguana, giant

Igundi or NPC party
Tribesman or giant leech
Troglodyte

Bullywug

Hobgoblin or giant leech
Lizard man

Gnoll or giant sundew
Snake, const. or pois.
Ghoul or ghast

Troll or shambling mound
Will’o wisp or vampiric mist
Hydra

DM Special

DM Special

Aerial Encounters

Gorgimera or dragonnel
Dragonne

Pegasus

Larnmasu or couatl
Hawk, blood or giant wasp
Owl, giant or giant hornet
Eagle, giant or hippogriff
Eagle or griffon

Hawk or raven

Common bird or bat
Common bird or owl
Harpy or gargoyle
Manticora

Aarakocra or margoyle
Ogre mage or wyvern
Chimera

Ki-rin or roc

DM Special

DM Special

 

 

 

Temperate Mountain

Dragon, cloud or red

Bear, cave or hydra
Gnome or mountain dwart
Bear, brown or lyc. bear
Bugbear

Aerial encounter

Worg or tyrg

Tribesman (NPC party 10%)
Badger, giant or giant eagle
Giant, hill

Giant, stone

Ogre or troll

Hobgoblin or orc
Crystalmist or mist wolf
Verbeeg or galeb duhr
Will’o wisp (sylph 10%)
Giant, frost or fire

DM Special

DM Special

Temperate Desert

Wyvern or dragon, blue
Dragon, brass or copper
Hydra or hydra, pyro-
Sandling

Lizard, giant

Horse, wild

Dog, wild or wolf
Nomad or NPC party
Nomad or dervish
Merchant

Lion

Goblin or hobgoblin
Snake, pois. or spitting
Aerial encounter

Spider, large or ant lion
Cactus, vampire
Pegasus or griffon

DM Special

DM Special

Sylvan Setting

Elf, grey or grugach
Dryad or swanmay
Atomie or grig

Bear, brown or giant boar
Brownie or buckawn
Pegasus or unicormm

Sprite or pixie

Ogre or minotaur

Pilgrim or leopard
Centaur or elf, wood
Satyr or wolf

Badger, giant or giant weasel
Bandit or small mammal
Troll or lion

Ettin or ettercap
Manticora or basilisk
Chimera or harpy

DM Special

DM Special
Tropical Encounters

Tropical or Subtropical Plain or Scrub

Jackalwere

Scorpion, giant

Dog, wild or wolf
Cheetah

Aerial encounter

Bandit (slaver)
Merchant

Herd animal

Herd animal

Elephant

Baboon

Tribesman or NPC party
Lion

Hyena

Leopard or jackal
Snake, poisonous or spitting
Ant, giant or ant lion
DM Special

DM Special

Tropical or Subtropical Marsh or Swamp

Tiger, sabre-tooth

Yuan ti

Mist, vampiric

Toad, giant or poisonous
Crocodile

Herd animal

Frog, giant or poisonous
Tribesman or NPC party
Lizard man or grung
Bullywug or grippli

Snake, const. or pois.
Centipede, giant or megalo-
Leech, giant or dragonfly
Hydra or shambling mound
Lizard, giant

Behir or minotaur lizard
Zombie, juju

DM Special

DM Special

Underdark Encounters

ZygZom

Snail, flail

Trapper or purple worm
Mold, brown or violet fungus
Xorn or deep gnome (svirfneblin)
Myconid or lurker above
Roper or neo-otyugh

Otyugh or horgar

Jermlaine or snyad

Shrieker or unusual fungus
Troglodyte or kuo-toa

Hook horror or giant slug
Drow or duergan

Drow or drider

Umber hulk or tentamort
Aboleth, mind flayer, or grell
Beholder or gas spore

DM Special

DM Special

Tropical or Subtropical Mountain

2 Dragon, cloud
3 Pyrolisk
4 Pilgrim or merchant
§ Herd animal or cockatrice
6 Ape, carnivorous or elephant
7 Aarakocra
8 Giantkin, cyclops
9 Tribesman
10 Tiger or leopard
11L Dog, wild or wolf
12 Medusa
13 Bandit (slaver)
14 «Aerial encounter
15 Rakshasa or roc
le Snake, poisonous
17 Yuan ti
18 Manticora (sylph 10% )
19 DM Special
20 DM Special

Tropical or Subtropical Rough or Hill#

Rakshasa

Scorpion, giant or ant lion
Mantrap

Boar, warthog or elephant
Dog, wild or wolf

Lizard, minotaur

Bandit (slaver) or mongrelmen
Merchant or NPC party

10 Baboon or carnivorous ape
11 Tribesman

12 Herd animal

13. Herd animal or lion

14 Hyena or jackal

15 Aerial encounter

16 Tiger or hieracosphinx

17 Lyc., tiger or yuan ti

18 Snake, spitting

19 DM Special

20 DM Special

Os Oo me ww he

Notes:

# Including ruins (cities, temples, fortresses)
within 5 miles of the party.

Monsters listed together are equally likely to occur
unless otherwise specified.

Monsters in italic type are 75% likely to be airborne
when they are encountered,

DM Special: Either choose a creature based on party
level, or roll randomly, A special encounter can also
be a natural hazard (storm; avalanche) or an
encounter witha known NPC.

Gnoll: All wilderness gnoll encounters are 10%
likely to be with flind.

Hobgoblin: Hobgoblin encounters. are 10% likely to
be with norkers.

NPC Party: NPC parties in the wilderness will often
be near to the adventuring group in number, level,
and equipment. Otherwise the typical NPC party
will be 7th to 10th level, with henchmen of approxi-
mately half (round up) character level. Such parties
are 90% likely to be mounted (see NPC Parties).

 

  

 
 

GREYH <
EAS)

 

Tropical or Subtropical Forest

2 Scorpion, giant
3 Lye. tiger or couatl
4 Naga, spirit
5 Stirge or ketch
6 Choke creeper or triflower frond
7 Grippli or huge spider
8 Tribesman or bandit (slaver)
9 Beastman (NPC party 10%)
10 Elephant or baboon
11. ‘Tiger or giant iguana
12 Ettercap or forest trapper
13. Snake const. or pois.
14 Jaguar or leopard
15 Herd animal
16 Ape, carn. or bonesnapper
1? Toad, giant or poisonous
18 Dragonfly, giant or yuan ti
19 DM Special
20 DM Special

Tropical or Subtropical Desert

2 Djinn or efreet

3 Ant lion or sandling

4 Naga, spirit

5 Camel, dromedary

6 Lion or leopard

7 Aerial encounter

& Bandits (slavers)

9 NPC party or pilgrims
10 Nomad or dervish

11 Nomad or merchant

12 Jackal

13 Dog, wild or death

14 Snake, pois. or spitting
15. Toad, giant or fire

16 Aerial encounter

17 Scorpion, huge or giant
18 Dragonne or brass dragon
19 DM Special

20 DM Special

Ogres: All wilderness ogre encounters are 10% likely
to be with ogre magi.

Aerial Encounter Notes

Bats are usually encountered only at night.

Owls are usually encountered only at night or in for-
ests.

Common bird: These are normal avians such as wild
ducks, parrots, ravens, seagulls, sparrows, swans,
and so on.

Special aerial encounters could include dragons, ge-
niekind, invisible stalkers, sphinxes, aerial servants,
air elementals and so on, Other special encounters
are missile fire from the ground or special aerial pa-
trols (e.g. elven knights mounted on hippogriffs),
Underdark Encounter Notes

Unusual fungi have a special property assigned by
the DM, such as being exceptionally nourishing. giv-
ing off light, curing damage or disease, neutralizing
Poison, causing strength or weakness if eaten, repel-
ling certain creatures, etc.

DM specials might include trained hunting spiders,
pack lizard trains, ochre jellies of twice normal size,
etc.
Salt Cold/Temp. Water Surface
2 Dragon, mist
3 Afanc or dragon turtle
4 Selkie or sea otter
5 Scrag or sea sprite
6 Depths encounter
7 Warship or pirate
8 Narwhale or sea lion
9 Merchant
10 Shark
11 Whale
12 Fisherman or killer whale
13 Hazard (ice) or seaweed
14 Dolphin
15 Aerial encounter
16 Ghost ship or sea zombie
17 Will'o wisp or strangleweed
18 Seawollf, lesser
19 DM Special
20 DM Special

Salt Cold/Temp. Water Depths
2 Kraaken
3 Urchin, black or green
4 Lobster (crayfish) or crab
5 Lamprey or giant eel
6 Hippocampus or triton
7 Kaolinth or mermen
8 Kapoacinth
9 Quipper, giant or giant snake
10 ‘Fish school
11 Whale or fish school
12 Shark or sahuagin
13 Dolphin or sea lion
14 Sea turtle, giant
15 Squid, giant or octopus
16 Seawolf, greater
17 Snail, giant or giant shark
18 Sunken ship
19 DM Special
20 DM Special

Salt Tropical Water Surface
2 Dragon, mist
3 Strangleweed
4 Pirates, small boats
5 Pirates, warship
6 Depths encounter
7 Shark, giant

8 Crocodile, giant

9 Seaweed or sea turtle

10 Whale

11 Merchant

12 Fisherman

13 Shark

14 Barracuda

15 Aerial encounter

16 Warship

17 Seawolf, greater

18 Ghost ship or sea zombie

19 DM Special

20 DM Special

Salt Tropical Water Depths
2 Urchin, yellow or silver
3 Urchin, green or red
4 Snake, poisonous
5 Crocodile, giant or sea sprite
6 Ray, sting or pungi
7 Octopus or manta ray
8 Sahuagin

9 Seaweed (strangleweed 10%)

10 Fish school (vodyanoi 10%)

11 Fish school

12 Shark

13 Eel, giant or locathah

14 Barracuda

15 Hippocampus or triton

16 Kapoacinth or lacedon

17 Snake, sea or giant slug

18 Ray, ixixachitl

19 DM Special

20 DM Special

Fresh Tropical Water Surface

Crystal ooze

Kelpie

Nymph

Eel, electric

Depths encounter
Snake, giant const.
Pirate, small boats
Crocodile

Hazard (navigational)
Fisherman or merchant
Piranha

Frog, giant or poisonous
Aerial encounter
Seaweed

Seaweed (choke creeper)
Frog, killer

Naga, water

DM Special

DM Special

Fresh Cold/Temp. Water Surface

om You ew

Dragon, mist

Greenhag or nymph

Otter, giant or lacedon
Water beetle, giant

Depths encounter

Lizard man

Pirate or warship

Land encounter

Hazard, navigational or ice
Fisherman or trapper
Merchant

Otter or beaver, giant
Aerial encounter

Merrow or scrag

Nixie or swan (swanmay 10%)
Frog, giant or giant leech
Naga, water or sea hag
DM Special

DM Special

Fresh Cold/Temp. Water Depths

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

Morkoth or dragon turtle
Otter, giant or nymph
Quipper, common or giant
Vodyanoi or giant catfish
Lacedon or kapoacinth
Kaolinth or giant crab
Crayfish, giant

Turtle, giant snapping

Fish school

Fish schoal

Nixie or giant pike

Lizard man or giant gar
Octopus or giant water spider
Merrow or giant water beetle
Lamprey or marine eel
Snake, giant sea

Sunken ship

DM Special

DM Special

Fresh Tropical Water Depths

2
3
4
2
6
7
8
9
10
il
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

Vodyanoi

Eel, weed

Kelpie

Beetle, giant water
Spider, giant water
Snake, giant const.
Seaweed or strangleweed
Crab or crayfish, giant
Octopus or giant eel
Pirhana, giant

Fish school

Turtle, giant snapping
Lizard man

Nixie

Kapoacinth

Bunyip or water naga
Snake, giant sea

DM Special

DM Special

Notes:

Aerial, Land, or Depth Encounters: Roll on
the appropriate table. If the encounter is not
suitable, then none occurs.

Surface Encounters: Unintelligent monsters
are 75% likely to be driven off by flaming ="
oil nearby, 90% if actually burned by it.

Large amounts of food thrown overboard

are 50% likely to end such an encounter.

Fish School: This is a large group of one
type of fish, the aquatic version of herd
animals, They usually do not attack, unless
commanded by magical means. If panicked
they might mill about, obstructing vision
and movement. If large enough, they might
cause buffeting damage (1-2 to 1-8,
depending on size),

Ghost Ship: This is a lost ship manned by
undead, Although it can be seen at any time,
it will usually attack only at night, when its
masters are at full power. Roll percentile dice
once for the crew and once for their leaders.
Crew: 01-40 (EQ) 10-40 skeletons, 41-80
(EQ) 10-40 zombies, 81-00 (EQ) 10-20 juju
zombies. Leaders: 01-30 (EQ) 1-4 wights,
31-60 (EQ) 1-3 wraiths, 61-80 (EQ) 1-2 |
spectres, 81-95 (EQ) 1-2 ghosts, 95-00 (EQ) 1
lich.

Hazard (ice): This can be a single huge ice
mountain or 10-20 smaller, grinding floes.
Hard contact with ice reduces seaworthiness
by 5% and is 10% likely to require a
seaworthiness check to avoid sinking.

Hazard (navigational): This can ground or
damage a vessel that does not have aboard a
pilot familiar with the waters. Such hazards
as sandbars and submerged logs often
change position,

Seaweed: This includes both floating masses
of weed and beds on the bottom. The former
slow ships by 50%. The latter are 30-300'
high and reduce vision to 10 feet. Both
provide a 40% chance for another encounter
if moved through or investigated.

Special Encounters: These can include
morkoth, mottled worms, shipwreck
survivors, an eye of the deep, pearl beds,
sudden storms, seaweed that allows
underwater breathing when eaten, giant
clams, aquatic versions of carnivorous
plants, storm giants, and so on.
 
a)

~
[=]
=
mw

 
 
 

2107-MC5
Ce) cel tC (err rene ti

Appendix

| Prepare yourselves and your
characters. . . . Here come more
monsters, this time from the
Cea S PAA CRO Taney Vict mccmntiatcd i Vac)
G64 pages are filled with beasties and

ogi Cm ico) gn-C)e cao Ase) ela

a Sada new ne bn ele Gavilan ce

dragons (yes, there are more—four
s . ; more, to be precise), and plenty
of ree plants await entry into your campaign. As always, these
monster descriptions are organized into 64 5-hole punched pages,
ready to be incorporated into your Monstrous Compendium
binder. And, you get four full-color dividers with identification tabs!
Snap them in, and set them free!

SONS 1 etn e Lon)

TSR, Inc. Beane

ire): Pore ea

eceary ke SRT}

ESC ra we See Deca
Cesta ne

©1990 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Printed in U.S.A.
ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AD&D, GREYHAWK, PRODUCTS OF YOUR IMAGINATION,
POROUS

$9.95 US

 
