 

 

 

 

 
 

 

Design Coordinator and Noodger: Jeff Grubb

Designers: Karen Boomgarden, Tim Brown, William W. Connors,
Troy Denning, Dale Donovan, Newton Ewell, Andria Hayday,
Bruce Heard, Dale “Slade” Henson, Harold Johnson,

J. Paul LaFountain, Jim Lowder, Blake Mobley, Kim Mohan,
Roger Moore, Bruce Nesmith, Doug Niles, Jean Rabe,
Steven Schend, Skip Williams, and Steve Winter

Original Design Concept for Monstrous Compendium:
David “Zeb” Cook, Steve Winter, and Jon Pickens

Editor: Mike Breault

Typesetting: Tracey Zamagne
Artistic Coordinator: Peggy Cooper
Cover Art: Jeff Easley

Interior Art: Thomas Baxa and Mark Nelson

 

Distributed to the book trade by Random House, Inc., and in Canada by Random House Ltd. Distributed to the toy and hobby trade
by regional distributors. Distributed in the United Kingdom by TSR Ltd.

This work is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America. Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the material
or artwork herein is prohibited without the express written consent of TSR, Inc.

TSR, Ine TSR Led.

POB 756 ™ 120 Church End, Cherry Hinton

Lake Geneva, Cambridge CB1 3LB

W153147 USA United Kingdom
TSR, Inc.

©1990 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Printed in the U.S.A.

ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AD&D, SPELLIAMMER, PRODUCTS OF YOUR IMAGINATION, and the TSR logo are
trademarks owned by TSR, Inc.

ISBN 0-88038-871-4
About This Product

The SPELLJAMMER™ fantasy setting was introduced in late
1989. It took the AD&D® game into a new realm—the realm of
space. A handful of new monsters were introduced, and a bunch
of old favorites (beholders, mind flayers, lizard men, etc.) were
given new life in mew worlds. But these were a starting pack at
best. Something, as they say, had to be done.

Folk from many different departments at TSR came together to
design this project. They were attracted by the challenge. They
were attracted by the downright weirdness of it, But most of all,
they were attracted by the idea that the money that would nor-
mally be spent for freelance design would go into the Party Fund,
so we could throw a few bashes that were more than a bathtub
full of soda and some cheese logs.

It was an experiment, and here are the results. More than 50
creatures of space: new races, stowaways, hazards, and natives
of wildspace and the Flow. The powerful and the wimpy, the awe-
inspiring and the amusing.

Just so you know whom to blame when the giant space ham-
sters chew your rigging to bits, or your favorite mage ends up on
the bad side of a jammer leech, here is a list of who did what.

Jeff Grubb: Design Coordinator & General Noodger

Karen Boomgarden & Newton Ewell: Esthetic, Lakshu, Reigar

Tim Brown: Focoid, Gravislayer, Plasman

William W. Connors: Clockwork Horror, Radiant Golem

Troy Denning: Blazozoid, Misi

Dale Donovan: Pirate of Gith, Spacesea Giant

Andria Hayday: Lumineaux

Bruce Heard: Aartuk, Rogue Moon, Space Mimic

Dale “Slade” Henson: Symbiont

Harold Johnson: Argos, Beholder-kin, Fractine, Mortiss

J. Paul LaFountain: Astereater, Phlog-Crawler

Jim Lowder: Albari, Jammer Leech, Zard

Blake Mobley: Plasmoid (DeGleash, Dralad, Ontalak),
Wizshade, Zodar

Kim Mohan: Nay-Churr

Roger Moore: Furnace Golem, Giant Space Hamster,
Grommann, Infinity Vine

Bruce Nesmith: Ancient Mariner, Asteroid Spider, Colossus,
Delphinid, Dizantar

Doug Niles: Chattur, Hadozee, Puffer, Rastipede, Syllix

Jean Rabe: Lutum, Murderoid, Spiritjam

Steven Schend: Q'Nidar

Skip Williams: Wiggle, Wryback

Steve Winter: Rock Hopper, Slinker, Survivor

Have fun in the Spelljammer Universe!
Aartuk

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Warrior Elder
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any Any
FREQUENCY: Rare Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Tribe Tribe
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any
DIET: Omnivore Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10) High (13-14)
TREASURE: Q (I) W (1)
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil Lawful evil
NO. APPEARING: 10-100 1 per tribe
ARMOR CLASS: 6 (6) 5 (6)
MOVEMENT: 6 (6) 5 (6)
HIT DICE: 2+1 5+1
THACO: 19 15
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 l
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-8 (pellets) 5-30 (fire seeds)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil Spells
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil Nil
SIZE: M (6’ tall) L (8' tall)
MORALE: Steady (11-12) Elite (15-16)
XP VALUE: 120 3,000

The aartuk are nomadic vegetables organized into small tribes.
One elder leads each tribe. Constantly seeking worthy adversar-
ies, they are religious fanatics that view war as the ultimate form
of art.

The warrior and elder aartuk look the same. The aartuk body
has the general shape of a star. It is covered with thick, flexible
bark, similar to spiked leather, The aartuk moves on its branches,
the tips of which end in suction cups that the aartuk uses to hold
onto vertical or inverted surfaces. Each suction cup houses a clus-
ter of three retractable pseudopods that can be used to handle
small objects. The head of an aartuk stands on a six-foot-tall,
snake-like stalk that can coil in and out of the center of the star.
The head is oblong in shape, with a hole on one end surrounded
by three black lumps. These are the sensory organs of the aartuk,
which enable it to detect movement via vibration, smell, and in-
frared vision, The aartuk cannot see visible light,

Aartuk come in a variety of strains. There are tribes of grey
specimens that favor sandy or very dusty environments. Some
tribes look more like rough stones, ranging from light brown to
dark grey. Other tribes let mosses, mushrooms, and other small
plants grow on their limbs; these types generally prefer to live in
dense foliage. In all cases, aartuk are capable of concealing them-
selves in their natural environment (80% chance of success if the
viewer is 30 or more feet away).

Combat: Aartuk can spit a secretion through the opening in their
heads. The secretion solidifies upon contact with air and forms a
rock-hard pellet that causes 1d8 points of damage. The range and
other effects of the pellet are identical to those of a regular sling
bullet. An aartuk can shoot one such pellet per round of combat,
without any penalty for close combat.

Instead of shooting a pellet, an aartuk may choose to shoot
forth its gooey tongue to entangle an adversary. The sticky
tongue is effective up to a maximum distance of 30 feet. When at-
tacked by the tongue, the victim must roll a successful Dexterity
check or become immobilized. An unconscious victim is auto-
matically entangled, A successful Strength check is needed to pull
free of the sticky tongue, with acumulative —1 penalty per round
of continuous immobilization.

The goal of the aartuk is to pull the victim to the center of its

 

 

 

 

 

body. The head then coils back into the center of the body to hold
the victim down, while the branches roll back to crush the victim,
The aartuk thus causes 1d8 points of damage per round to an im-
mobilized victim. The aartuk does not use its branches for com-
bat in any other fashion.

An elder aartuk fights as a warrior, with the addition of priest
spells and a more potent missile weapon, The elder's pellet has
twice the range as that of a warrior. The pellet produces a small
spark on impact. In normal space, the spark has no effect other
than tipping off opponents to the real nature of the elder—which
is not apparent to humans. In the phlogiston however, the spark
ignites a fireball that causes 5d6 points of damage. The elder usu-
ally does not fight when sailing through phlogiston, in order to
avoid accidentally harming itself or other aartuk warriors that
could be in the area of effect. By instinct, the elder prudently curls
up its front branches just before spitting a pellet.

The elder is capable of casting spells as a 4th-level priest with a
Wisdom of 14 (five Ist-level spells and two 2nd-level spells). It
must pray to its god (as a normal priest) to regain its spells. Aar-
tuk elders are likely to have the following spells:

If prepared for combat: Cause fear, curse, command, darkness,
magical stone *, chant, and flame blade

When traveling: Detect good, detect magic, endure cold/heat,
protection from good, sanctuary, charm person or mammal, and
know alignment

* The elder may cast magical stone on up to three pellets. Al-
though the affected pellets have not yet been secreted at the time
the spell is cast, it nonetheless remains effective until all three pel-
lets are actually shot, or until the spell reaches the end of its nor-
mal duration. lt enables these pellets to hit monsters that only
magical weapons can affect, The damage is the same, but the ef-
fect vanishes when the pellet hits a target or an obstacle.

Aartuk warriors normally avoid harming opponents they be-
lieve to be able to control spelljamming devices. They try to cap-
ture and drag such opponents away from the scene of a combat. If a
fight went against them, aartuk would retreat, taking their prisoner
Aartuk

with them.

Habitat/Society: Aartuk can be found anywhere in areas of wild-
space or beyond, in the phlogiston. Tales and legends of their past
indicate that their original world was destroyed by the Tyrant
Race. Aartuk vow an ancestral hatred toward beholder-kin, and
they go to great lengths to cause these creatures any kind of harm
in their power,

Several individuals once managed to get aboard spelljamming
ships and eventually took them over. There are now many tribes
with flotillas of ships captured from fallen enemies. The elder of a
tribe is the only aartuk in that tribe capable of piloting a spelljam-
ming ship. Slaves are used to control other ships in a flotilla.
Once they capture a ship, the aartuk proceed to modify to make it
resemble their preferred environment. Depending on the tribes,
ships can be made to look like rocky asteroids, suspended gar-
dens, dusty wrecks, etc. Aartuk cannot make spelljamming, de-
vices of their own.

Aartuk do not value precious metals, other than as lures for po-
tential victims. They appreciate gems (their currency), magical
weapons, and art pieces related to the topic of war, which they
keep as war trophies. Some rare aartuk magical items with vari-
ous powers are worn as torques at the base of their head stalks,
within the cavity at the center of their bodies. These items may
improve Armor Class or grant special abilities common to magi-
cal rings (such as invisibility, mind shielding, regeneration, or
telekinesis). These are typically reserved for the aartuk aristoc-
racy and the elders (see the “Elders” description below for both).
Humanoids can use aartuk magical torques, wearing them as arm
bracers, Only one such item can be used at a time (wearing two
prevents either from functioning). Aartuk cannot use any other
types of magical items.

Aartuk live and die for war, which is linked to their religion
and reproductive system (see “Ecology”). Aartuk are known to
attack small colonies or isolated warships. When they encounter
an obviously weaker opponent, aartuk find it more honorable to
take prisoners and question them about the location of a more
suitable opponent. They later release all these prisoners (except
potential slave pilots) after taking away any gems or war tro-
phies. Different aartuk tribes occasionally ally to attack larger
targets, but they generally have no intertribal contact.

Warriors without an elder are likely to seek another tribe of the
same breed; they will offer great war trophies to be accepted as
tribe members by the new elder. If warriors do not have a slave pi-
lot, they drift in space, hoping for an unsuspecting vessel to board
them. They either attempt to take over that ship—with its pilot
alive—or give away part of their treasures to buy themselves safe
passage. Aartuk usually are true to their word and will respect a
reasonable agreement.

Aartuk are air breathers and are capable of speech. They need
their ships to retain sufficient air, food, and water to travel long
distances, They also rely on their elder leader, who can filter stale
air to produce oxygen sufficient for 50 aartuk. Because of this lim-
itation, aartuk are not known for not keeping prisoners very
long. These are either set adrift on a raft, or unceremoniously dis-
patched to the storeroom.

Aartuk speak various dialects specific to their breeds (rustles,
snaps, clicks, pops, and whistles). Aristocrats and elders are
likely to speak another two or three more tongues among those
languages commonly used in their region (or pick at random: El-
ven 01-20, Human Common 21-40, Beholder 41-70, Neogi 71-80,
Dracon 81-90, the Arcane tongue 91-95, or Illithid 96-00),

Aartuk worship deities of various origins, though all of these

are evil patrons of war. Some tribes have adopted the worship of
human deities or those of other monstrous creatures. The elder
provides the clerical guidance for one specific deity. Aartuk nor-
mally burn their dead and keep the ashes (and magical items, if
any) within urns. These urns are taboo and no aartuk dares tam-
per with these for fear of waking the dead.

Ecology: Aartuk can ingest any kind of nourishment. They nor-
mally cook their food and can prepare sophisticated dishes. They
absorb their food through an opening underneath their bodies.

An aartuk reproduces by infecting an unconscious victim with
a virus that progressively turns the victim’s flesh to jelly in a few
days. The victim loses 1d6 points of Constitution per day until
death occurs or until a cure disease spel] destroys the virus (a con-
valescent recovers 1 point of Constitution per day). A fully
grown aartuk warrior—with the memories of the warrior who in-
fected the victim—emerges from the jelly in one month.

Aartuk infect victims by leaving their tongues on a open
wound for three rounds. Aartuk view the “gift of birth” as a sign
of respect and honor toward a victim, The infection of a victim is
a religious ritual that must be overseen by the elder of the tribe.
There is no gender among the aartuk.

The bodies of aartuk, either dead or alive, provide no useful
components for magic, though the slime on their tongues makes
an effective glue when boiled to the appropriate concentration.
The tongues may be hung and left to dry for several weeks, which
produces an average quality rope. When properly fermented, the
sap of elders makes a beverage greatly desired by beholders. An
elder provides enough sap to brew a small keg of aartukia. A
shrewd merchant could get several thousand gold pieces for the
sale of a single keg.

Elder Aartuk

The elder is a very old, wise aartuk warrior. It is clear when a
warrior aartuk is becoming an elder because it “blossoms.” This
normally happens when a warrior Aartuk reaches 70-90 years of
age. Depending on its breed, the aartuk's “flowers” may look like
rocky outgrowths, very colorful mushrooms, or sweet-smelling,
exuberant orchids.

During that period, the aartuk becomes the equivalent of the
human “aristocrat.” Although the aristocrat is identical to a com-
mon warrior (in game terms), it is nevertheless treated with much
deference by its fellow warriors, and it does not have to under-
take menial duties, This increased respect is explained by the fact
that an aartuk’s blooming signifies either its imminent death or its
final transformation to elderhood. The flowers last for about one
Earth year, after which they wither and fall off. At that point, the
aartuk must roll a successful saving throw vs. death magic or
shrivel and die as well.

If it survives, the aartuk sheds its skin and regains a newer,
stronger vitality. It is then hailed as a new elder, and it soon leaves
with a small group of younger followers to start another tribe. A
new elder lives another 40-60 years, after which it dies of old age.
A new tribe is traditionally granted one spelljamming ship and,
whenever possible, a few slave pilots and some treasure. If the
mother tribe has only one ship, the two elders fight a traditional
duel that ends in the death of one of them. The survivor takes
over the tribe.

Aartuk can tell an elder from common aartuk by its smell.
Other races that do not have a keen sense of smell cannot readily
tell the difference. Elders are immune to those spells or magical ef-
fects that either control the physical movement of plants or alter
their physical shapes.
Albari

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any

 

 

 

 

 

FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (15-16)
TREASURE: Any or nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral
NO. APPEARING: l

ARMOR CLASS: 8

MOVEMENT: 1, Fl 33 (B)

HIT DICE: 6

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-3/1-3 or 1-2/1-3

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 75%

SIZE: S (3'-4' tall)
MORALE: Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 4,000

The albari are a race of magical, bird-like creatures that are
equally at home in wildspace or the phlogiston. They are dedi-
cated to the cause of chaos and seem to exist for no other reason
but to throw other beings’ lives into unrest.

An albari possesses a long, almost-human face with a wide
beak and slanted, beady eyes. No ears are visible, though an al-
bari's hearing is very keen. The creature's face, like the rest of its
body, is covered by short, oily feathers. These range in color from
pure white to sooty gray, with the male's coloration tending to-
ward the lighter shades. An albari’s wings are impressive, and
many specimens have been found with wingspans of up to nine
feet. Small, clawed hands can be found on the wings, about half-
way along their length. The creature uses these for simple manual
tasks, like eating. For more complex activities, the albari uses its
feet, Graced with a strong opposable digit, an albari’s feet are
much like human hands, with the main difference being the num-
ber and type of “fingers.” Three sharply taloned digits and one
thickly clawed opposable thumb rest at the end of both the al-
bari’s long, jointed legs. All albari are practiced in balancing on
one leg and using the other to manipulate objects,

They speak their own high-pitched, shrieking language, as well
as various trade dialects and the languages of many spacetaring
races.

Combat: Albari avoid physical combat whenever possible. If
forced into a physical confrontation in the air, they attack with
their two taloned feet, which cause 1d3 points of damage each.
On the ground, they attack first with their beaks, inflicting 1-2
points of damage, then with one foot for 1d3 points.

Magic, specifically illusion, is the preferred weapon of the al-
bari. All albari have the ability to become invisible at will. They
can cast change self, ventriloquism, blur, and misdirection, each
twice per day. They can cast phantasmal killer, dream, hallucina-
tory terrain, and mislead, each once per day. As any albari’s moti-
vation can change with alarming speed, it is difficult to state
exactly how these spells will be employed. However, it's safe to
assume that they will always attempt to confound their enemies
with illusions before running away.

Habitat/Society: Though albari revel in chaos, there is often a
method to their madness. An albari will decide upon a specific

 

 

 

 

 

 

course of action—say, insuring that a ship gets hopelessly lost in
the phlogiston—and stick to it for a short period of time. On av-
erage, this period is 1d6é days. At the end of that time, the creature
might then change its mind or decide to continue. Albari usually
do the former. They can be hard set upon ruining a ship one mo-
ment, then try everything in their power to save it the next.

They use their illusionary powers to sow chaos as much as pos-
sible. Often, an albari will use a dream spell upon the captain of a
passing ship, simply to cause him to change course. They some-
times make short-term deals with other creatures in space, such as
murderoids, agreeing to lure unwary ships to their doom. On the
other hand, albari have also been known to lead ships to vast
treasures for little or no reward. Their favorite trick, however, is
to trail a ship until it get into a combat situation, then fly to the
opposing ship and reveal everything they know. Of course, the
albari can lie in this situation, too.

Because albari need air to breathe, they often tag along inside a
ship's air pocket in the phlogiston, remaining invisible, but cast-
ing an occasional spell to keep things lively aboard the vessel
they've adopted. Albari frequently sneak aboard ships, too. Then
they are often magically disguised as a halfling, rock hopper, or
other small humanoid.

Causing trouble takes up most of the albari’s time, though pairs
occasionally get together to mate. Young albari spend a few
weeks hidden in a haphazardly constructed nest before venturing
out on the unsuspecting world. These nests can usually be found
almost anywhere secretive, though, true to the albari’s nature,
nests have been found in the middle of busy ports.

Ecology: The albari is hated by most intelligent races throughout
the spheres. Some creatures, like the neogi, slay an albari on
sight, Few economic uses have been discovered for the albari,
however. Its meat is tough and foul-tasting, and its feathers are
far too oily for ornamental use. On a few worlds, heavily treated
albari-feather pillows are a status symbol, more for their rarity
than their utility.
Ancient Mariner

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Phlogiston
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: — Crew
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: None
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)
TREASURE: H
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1-6
ARMOR CLASS: 4
MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 5+3
THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: l
DAMAGE/ATTACK: _ 1-6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: — Energy drain
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (5’ tall)
MORALE: Elite (14)
XP VALUE: Normal: 2,000

Captain: 3,000
Mariner shadow: 650

An ancient mariner is the undead spirit of a member of a long-lost
evil race that once sailed the phlogiston seas.

A true ancient mariner is basically humanoid in appearance. Its
neck is a little too long and its torso is somewhat compressed
compared to those of a human. The eyes and jaw bulge out from
the face. Its voice is quavery, as if being heard from a great dis-
tance.

An ancient mariner is partially transparent. It is seen wearing
the bright, garish clothing normally associated with pirates and
buccaneers. It appears as it did on the day it died, causing each to
be unique. This may mean an eye patch, scars, or even a wooden
peg leg. While the mariner might carry a weapon of virtually any
type, this is also ghostly and cannot cause damage.

Combat: The chill touch of the ancient mariner inflicts 1d6 points
of cold damage and causes the victim to lose one level. As with
other undead that use this attack form, this effect reduces the Hit
Dice, class bonuses, spell abilities, etc.

They can be turned as wights by priests. Like most undead, an-
cient mariners are immune to sleep, charm, hold, and cold-based
spells. They are immune to any type of mind control spell as well.
They can be hit only by magical weapons.

Any creature killed by the energy drain of an ancient mariner
becomes an mariner shadow with most of the abilities of a normal
shadow. The newly formed undead obeys the ancient mariner
completely. (Beings killed by these shadows are merely dead, and
do not become shadows or any other form of undead.) A mariner
shadow retains its former appearance, though it is now partially
transparent. The power of the ancient mariner is such that all of
the victim’s equipment stays with it, becoming ghostly as well,
unable to touch or be touched by living hands. The equipment
cannot be used by the mariner shadow.

Habitat/Society: Ancient mariners are found only in phlogiston.
They will not enter a crystal sphere under any circumstances. It is
thought that they need the phlogiston to power their ghost ships.

If more than one ancient mariner is encountered, one of them is
the recognized leader and called “Captain” by its crew. This
leader has 6+3 Hit Dice and is turned as a wraith. Ancient mari-

 

 

 

 

ners are always encountered with a crew of 1d20 mariner
shadows, culled from any mixture of spacefaring races. Some
large ships have been known to have larger crews of mariner
shadows. If the captain is turned, he orders the entire ship to
break off combat and flee.

The greatest power of the ancient mariner captain is to make
any object become as insubstantial as the mariner itself. This
power requires the captain to “touch” the object and concentrate
for a turn. Once the object is changed, any ancient mariner or
mariner shadow can handle it. In this way the treasure hoards of
ancient mariners are increased.

A captain can do this to a spelljamming ship as well, which
conversion takes a full day of concentration, They prefer human
ships, such as galleons, hammerships, and caravels. Part of the
ancient mariner’s undead energy is given to the ship, which makes
the vessel insubstantial, partially transparent, and fuels it. It
moves as if powered by a Sth-level spellcaster. The ship becomes
immune to all physical or magical attacks. It has no physical sub-
stance, passing right through other objects. It holds no air. The
ghostly deck hands appear to walk normally upon it, even
swarming up the rigging occasionally. A captain can maintain
only one ship at a time in this fashion, although he can release a
ship from his sway and convert another.

If the ancient mariners on a ship are all killed, the mariner
shadows vanish instantly, becoming truly dead. The ghost ship
becomes solid and can be boarded and searched. There is a 50%
chance that the spelljamming helm is still usable. If only the cap-
tain is killed, the ancient mariner with the highest hit points be-
comes the new captain.

Ecology: Unlike most undead, ancient mariners do not seem to be
tied to a place or a person. They can roam freely, at least in phlo-
giston, and trade ships at will.

The original race of the ancient mariners must be long extinct,
since they look like no race in the known crystal spheres.
Argos

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Space/Any Earth-based body
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Feed till consume 2xHD, then rest 2
hours/HD
DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low to High (5-14)
TREASURE: U
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: 1
ARMOR CLASS: 0
MOVEMENT: 9, Fl 3 (B)
HIT DICE: 5-10
THACO: 5-6 HD: 15
7-8 HD: 13
9-10 HD: 11
NO, OF ATTACKS: 3 per victim
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 25%
SIZE: L-G (2' per HD)
MORALE: Champion (16)
XP VALUE: 5-6 HD: 2,000

(+1,000 for additional HD)

Argos are found in the same regions of wildspace as the baleful
beholder nations. An argos resembles a giant amoeba. It has one
large, central eye with a tripartite pupil, and a hundred lashless,
inhuman eyes and many sharp-toothed mouths. An argos can ex-
trude several pseudopods, each tipped with a fanged maw that
functions as a hand to manipulate various tools.

Argos move by slithering; they can cling to walls and ceilings.
They can levitate and fly at the very slow rate of 3.

Argos colors tend toward shades of transparent blues and vio-
lets; they smell like a bouquet of flowers. They are huge beasts
ranging in size from ten to 20 feet in diameter, weighing about 200
pounds per Hit Die. Though they exhibit signs of being intelligent
tool users, they do not wear clothes, choosing rather to carry gear
stored in temporary cavities within their bodies. However, their
digestive juices often ruin devices within two to three weeks (sav-
ing throw vs. acid).

Combat: An argos can attack with one to three weapons or items,
or it can enfold a victim in a pseudopod and attack with 1d3
mouths for 1d4 points of damage each, It may attack as many
foes in this way as it can physically reach,

If an argos rolls a natural 20 on an attack, it envelopes its vic-
tim, swallowing him whole. A swallowed victim suffers 2d8
points of damage each round from the creature's digestive juices.
The victim may attempt to cut his way free from within, using
only short cutting weapons. He must inflict 8 points of damage to
break free.

The eyes of an argos, like those of a beholder, have a variety of
special powers. An argos can bring 1d10 of its smaller eyes to bear
on any target, The large, central eye can focus only on targets
that are in front of the creature (within 90 degrees of the “straight-
ahead point” of the central eye). Though the creature has nearly
100 eyes, only 20 special powers have been noted; therefore a
number of eyes must possess the same power.

Each point of damage inflicted on an argos eliminates one eye;
the DM decides which powers are reduced in the process. It is pos-
sible to target one particular eye by attacking with a —4 penalty
to the attack roll.

 

 

 

 

 

Each ability of an argos’s eye is treated as a spell effect. Use the
argos’s Hit Dice as the caster level. Roll 1d20 and check the fol-
lowing table for a particular eye's power.

1. Blindness 11. Gaze Reflection

2. Burning Eyes (Hands) 12. Heat Metal

3. Charm Monster 13. Hold Monster

4, Clairvoyance 14. Imp. Phantasmal Force
5. Confusion 15. Irritation

6. Darkness, 15’ rad. 16. Light

7. Dispel Magic 17. Slow

8. Emotion 18. Suggestion

9. ESP 19. Tongues

10. Furnble 20. Turn Flesh to Stone

The central eye can use one of three different powers once per
round, It can create a personal illusion (an alter self spell), or it
can cast a color spray or a ray of enfeeblement spell.

Habitat/Society: Argos are solitary creatures, though it is not un-
heard of to discover an argos guardian aboard an eye tyrant ship.
Argos appear capable of replenishing their own air envelope and
thus may be encountered wandering asteroid rings and dust
clouds alone.

Despite its relative intelligence, an argos is a ravenous creature
driven by its hunger. It tries to lure prey into its grasp, feeding un-
til it has consumed a number of Hit Dice of creatures equal to two
times its own Hit Dice. It then slips away to digest its meal for a
period equal to two hours per Hit Dice of the argos. If an argos is
unable to find food within a week of its last meal, it loses 1 Hit Die
per week until it is a 5-Hit Die creature. After that point, it can hi-
bernate for up to a year by crystallizing its outer shell and form-
ing a chrysalis.

Ecology: Argos consume anything that moves and is digestible.
Their preference is to use their abilities to lure their prey into traps
and then to pick off individuals one at a time. It sorts through the
tools and weapons of its victims and keeps the useful items.
Astereater

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any space
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Carnivore

 

 

 

 

 

 

INTELLIGENCE: Low to average (5-10)
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil
NO. APPEARING: l

ARMOR CLASS: -2
MOVEMENT: FI 3 (B)

HIT DICE: 8

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: |
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-8

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Swallow whole
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: L (8'-12' diameter)
MORALE: Average (8-10)
XP VALUE: 2,000

In general, beholders and beholder-kin are a very intelligent (and
conceited) lot, Which is precisely why all of them deny any rela-
tion to the astereater. Though technically a beholder-kin, the as-
tereater has none of the intelligence or magical abilities its cousins
possess. In appearance, the astereater resembles a large beholder
(minus the eye stalks) with one other major difference: The skin
of the creature is virtually identical—in appearance and
consistency—to rock. Like the beholder, astereaters have a large,
central eye and a large mouth filled with pointed teeth.

Astereaters speak their own language, which consists of very
few words. They rarely hold a conversation with anything.

Combat: The rock-like skin of the astereater protects it very well.
When its eye and mouth are shut, the creature is virtually imper-
vious to any but very powerful or magical attacks.

The astereater’s normal method of attack is to hide at the edge
of an asteroid field and wait for passers-by to wander too close. It
attacks using its huge mouth. A normal hit inflicts 2d4 points of
damage, but any attack roll that exceeds the number needed by 5
or more means the astereater has swallowed its prey whole (obvi-
ously this doesn’t apply if the opponent is larger than the asterea-
ter). For example, if an astereater needs an attack roll of 9 or
better to hit, and the roll is 14 or greater, then the victim is swal-
lowed whole.

Anyone inside the belly of an astereater receives 1d6 points of
damage per round from the powerful digestive acids found there.
The victim may attack the astereater only if he held a small-sized
weapon prior to being swallowed. Treat the interior of the aste-
reater as AC 5. If the trapped person manages to inflict 12 points
of damage to the creature's stomach, he is expelled from the mon-
ster. The astereater cannot attack if it has someone in its stomach.

With its eye and mouth shut, the astereater is almost identical
to an asteroid in appearance. At distances of 30 feet or less, the as-
tereater is 50% likely to be mistaken for an asteroid. At distances
greater than 30 feet, it is indistinguishable from an asteroid.

Since the astereater is too slow to retreat from combat, it
chooses its opponents carefully before revealing itself and attack-
ing.

Habitat/Society: Like all beholder-kin, astereaters are hateful and
cruel. They cooperate neither with each other or anyone else un-
less it is of great benefit to themselves.

 

Astereaters hoard no treasure as they have no need for such tri-
fles. However, in the bellies of these creatures (particularly older
ones) there is usually a fair amount of incidental treasure that the
creature cannot digest. In older astereaters it is common to find
dozens of coins, various weapons, useless metal odds and ends,
and possibly some magical items and potions (the astereater can-
not digest glass or ceramic vials either).

An extremely rare but notable exception to the normal solitude
of the astereaters is their occasional association with small groups
of giff. It has been observed that astereaters sometimes act as
“leaders” of giff platoons. Because of the militaristic nature of the
giff and their aversion to serve anyone but their own kind, a giff
platoon serving under an astereater is typically no larger than 10
giff; the association is generally little more than enslavement. It
has been observed that this usually happens when an astereater
encounters a giff mercenary platoon that is weak from battle and
low in numbers. In this case, the astereater has little trouble domi-
neering the mercenaries. It is unknown why the creatures choose
giff as their slaves. Perhaps it is due to the giff's natural penchant
for servitude,

Asarule, beholders are a vicious species, holding great wars of
extermination among their own kind. Whole communities of be-
holders are casually destroyed as a matter of course. But the ha-
tred of the beholder race is greater still when directed toward
astereaters. Beholders see astereaters as large blots against them
and they stop at nothing to destroy what they consider to be vile
errors of creation.

Ecology: Astereaters are carnivores that readily eat the flesh of
any creature. They seem to prefer sentient species, especially hu-
mans and elves. Because of their extreme natural protection, they
have no natural enemies but intelligent creatures hunt astereaters
for the treasure they may hold in their stomachs.
Beholder-Kin

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Director Examiner Lensman Overseer Watcher
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any Any Any Any space Any space
FREQUENCY: Uncommon Rare Uncommon Very rare Rare
ORGANIZATION: Squad Squad Squad Solitary Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day Night Day Any Any
DIET: Omnivore Omnivore Insectivore Omniv ore Scavenger
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10) Genius (17-18) Low (5-7) Supra-genius Semi-(2-4)

(19-20)

TREASURE: G (2 V) Vx4 (V) R (L) (U, Vx2) Nil
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil Lawful neutral Neutral evil Lawful evil Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 5-100 1-6 2-20 1 1-4
ARMOR CLASS: 2 (4) 5 3/7 2/7 7
MOVEMENT: 10 HD: 18, Fl 6 (C) 9 1 Fl 6 (A)

FI.3 (A)

12 HD; 15,

FI 3 (A)

16 HD: 6,

FI 3 (A)
HIT DICE: 10/12/16 (8) 8 2 14 3+3
THACO: 10 HD: 11 13 19 7 17

12 HD: 9

16 HD: 5
NO. OF ATTACKS: 10 HD: 2/2/31 l 1 1

12 HD: 2

16 HD: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 10 HD: 1-6/1-6 1-6 or wpn 1-8 or wpn 3-12 3-18

12 HD: 2-8/2-8

16 HD:

3-12/3-12/1-8
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below See below Nil See below See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil See below See below See below See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 20% 25% Nil 35% Nil
SIZE: L (8'-10' diam.)

(M) M (4' diam.) M (5' tall) H (15' diam.) M (6’ diam.)
MORALE: Fanatic (18) Steady (11) Elite (14) Champion (16) Average (10)
XP VALUE: 10 HD: 8,000/ 6,000 175 15,000 420

10,000/16,000

12 HD: 10,000

16 HD: 16,000

Recent excursions into realms ravaged by beholder clan wars has
opened the eyes of the scholarly world. Where once it was be-
lieved that beholders were the chance result of arcane research,
reports tell of entire worlds devoted to beholders and their kin.

Directors

Directors are the warrior caste of abominations. Directors breed
and ride several specialized mounts. The directors are adapted for
riding and mindlinking with these mounts to better control them.

Directors resemble beholders, but their central eye is smaller
and set in bare musculature for ease in pivoting, and they possess
only six small eyes on retractable eye stalks. Further, directors
have a fanged mouth below their central eye and possess three
clawed sensory tendrils on their ventral surface. These tendrils
are used to cling to the mount and link with its limited mind.

Directors’ eyes have different powers than those of beholders
(all effects are as the spell of the same name):

1. Magic Missile (2/round) 4. Slow
2. Burning Eye (as 8th level) 5. Enervation
3. Wall of Ice 6. Imp. Phantasmal Force

A director's central eye has the power of deflection—all frontal

attacks upon director suffer a —2 penalty to the attack roll and
damage is halved. The director also gains a +2 bonus to all sav-
ing throws against spells cast by those in the field of view of the
central eye.

Directors have three different mounts to choose from, each
with different strengths and weaknesses, All of the mounts seem
to have derived from an insect stock, as they are covered in chitin
and have simple eye spots and multiple limbs.

Directors normally possess 8 Hit Dice, but when mounted the
director and mount are treated as a single creature whose Hit Dice
equals the sum of those of the director and mount. After a
director/mount suffers half damage, the mount's speed is reduced
to half and the director's gets only one physical attack per round.
A director may flee and leave his mount to fend for itself (the
mount suffers a —4 penalty to its attack rolls). Directors have an
AC of 4, but share the AC of their mount when mounted. Direc-
tors may use all of their normal powers while mounted, within
the restrictions of beholder targeting angles.

Mounts:

Hopper: A hopper is a two legged, two limbed flea. A hopper
has 2 Hit Dice. Its two legs are shaped like giant cricket legs; it can
make hops of 30 feet in distance and ten feet in height. Its two
Beholder-Kin

arms look like a praying mantis's fighting limbs and can slash for
1d6 points of damage each. Hoppers are herd animals and flock
together when not ridden, establishing their own pecking order.
They have an instinct to shelter their young beneath their legs.
Hoppers are herbivores and have chewing mandibles in front of
their arms.

Crawler: A crawler resembles a cross between a centipede and
a spider. It has 4 Hit Dice. It has ten legs, two pairs of frontal an-
tennae, and two fighting spider fangs that can be used for sepa-
rate stabbing attacks causing 2d4 points of damage each. Victims
who fail to roll successful saving throws vs. poison are paralyzed
for 1d4 rounds. Crawlers are omnivores that prefer to eat smaller
creatures, Unmounted, they may roll into a ball to gain an AC of
0. They have cutting mandibles beneath their front fangs.

Crusher: Crushers appear to be derived from monstrous
pseudoscorpions. Crushers have 8 Hit Dice, eight legs, two pin-
cers, and a tail. Some have a whip tail while others have a bludg-
eon tail, but both types have a nasty pair of pincers capable of
causing 1d10+2 points of damage each. The whip-tailed version
stings for 1d8 points of damage, plus 1d8 points of poison damage
if a saving throw vs. poison fails (no poison damage if the roll
succeeds), The bludgeon-tailed crusher causes 1d8 points of dam-
age but attacks all creatures as if their Armor Classes were 2
worse than they really are (this benefit is due to the tail’s great
weight). Crushers are solitary carnivores that are kept in separate
pens. Females tend to kill other females when not controlled, each
trying to create a harem of 2d4 males. The male is killed in the
mating process. Young cling to a female's back for safety. Crush-
ers have chewing, crushing mandibles between their pincers.

Examiners

Examiners, also called four-eyes, are the tool wielders of the be-
holder caste. An examiner is a four-foot-diameter sphere with no
central eye and only four small eyes, each on the end of an an-
tenna mounted atop the sphere. They have one small, lamprey-
like mouth on their ventral surface. This is surrounded by four
multijointed limbs ending in gripper pads. These limbs can pick
up and manipulate tools.

Examiners are the scholars and clerks of the beholders, in-
volved in spell and magical item enhancement, research, and cre-
ation. They can use any artifact or tool as well as a human, and
they can wield up to four items at a time. Examiners regenerate 1
point of damage each round. The powers of their four eyes are
given below (all spell-like effects are cast at 8th level).

1. Enlarge or Reduce 2. Identify or Legend Lore
3. Transmute Form 4. Spell Reflection as a ring
(similar to a Stone Shape spell, of spell turning

but works on all types of

nonmagical material)

Examiners are not the bravest of beholder-kin, but they are po-
tentially the most dangerous with their command of artifacts.
They are the lackeys of beholders and all greater beholder-kin.

Lensmen

Lensmen are the ultimate lackey caste. Their lack of eyes and
their limb configuration relegate them to roles of menial labor
and cannon fodder in the great wars. A lensman has one eye set in
the chest of a five-limbed, starfish-shaped simian body. Beneath
the eye is a leering, toothy maw. Four of the five limbs end in
three-fingered, two-thumbed clawed hands. The fifth limb, atop
the body, is a prehensile, whip-like tentacle. The typical beholder
chitin is soft and there are many short, fly-like hairs. Lensmen are
the only kin to wear any sort of garb—a webbing that is used to
hold tools and weapons. Their preferred weapons are double-
headed polearms.

Lensmen are semi-mindless drones that don’t question their lot
in life. The eye of each lensman possesses only one of the follow-
ing six special powers (all at 6th level of ability).

2. Heal
4. Tongues
6. Protections

1. Emotion

3. Dispel Magic

5. Phantasmal Force

(all types, but only one at a time)

Overseers

An overseer is second only to a hive mother in the hierarchy of
beholder races. An overseer’s duties include the organization of
world forces and the cataloging and analysis of information.

Overseers resemble fleshy trees. They have 13 limbs, each of
which ends in a bud that conceals an eye; one of these limbs forms
the top spine. Three yammering mouths surround this spine.
There are also eight thorny, vine-like limbs that are used to grasp
tools and to act as a physical defense, inflicting 1d10+2 points of
damage each. Overseers sit on root-like bases that can inch along
when movement is required. They cannot levitate.

Overseers do not wear clothes, but rather they grow a strange
furry fungus on their trunk. This fungus changes colors as the
overseers desire, commonly appearing as a mottled green, gray,
and brown.

Overseers may use any physical weapons or artifacts in their
eight limbs. The powers of their 13 eyes are as follows (all spell-
like effects are cast at 14th level).

1, Cone of Cold 2, Dispel Magic

3. Paralysis 4. Chain Lightning
5. Telekinesis 6. Emotion
7. Mass Charm 8. Domination

10. Major Creation
12. Serten’s Spell Immunity

9. Mass Suggestion
11. Spell Turning
13. Temporal Stasis

An overseer's AC is 2, but each eye stalk is AC 7 and is severed if
it suffers 10 points of damage. Overseers are very protective of
their health and always have one or two beholder guards and at
least a half dozen directors protecting their welfare.

Watcher

If lensmen are the lowest caste of beholder-kin, then watchers are
number two from the bottom. These creatures have been rele-
gated the role of information gatherers and are the least brave of
all the eye tyrant races. They use their quiet voice, message, and
tongues powers to whisper in others’ ears.

Watchers are six-foot-diameter spheres with three central eyes
arranged around the circumference of the sphere. These eyes are
huge and unlidded, On the crown of the sphere is a compound eye
and a ring of six eye spots that make it difficult to surprise a
watcher. A large tentacle with a barbed prehensile pad extends
from the ventral surface, right behind the small mouth with its
rasp-like tongue. Watchers feed on carrion and stunned prey.

Watchers can attack with their tentacle for 3d6 points of dam-
age. The tentacle also inflicts an electrical shock; victims who fail
a system shock roll fall unconscious. Watchers do not wear
clothes and do not use tools.

Each of a watcher’s main eyes has two powers, and the com-
pound eye on top may draw on three different abilities. The six
eye spots have no special powers.

Eye #1: True Seeing and ESP

Eye #2: Advanced Illusion and Demi-Shadow Magic

Eye #3: Telekinese 1,000 lbs and Teleport Compound Eye: Mes-
sage, Tongues, and Suggestion

Watchers are not aggressive warriors; they prefer misdirection
and flight to actual confrontation.
Blazozoid

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Wildspace
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Any matter
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)
TREASURE: None
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 7
MOVEMENT: FI36(B)(orSr1) |
HIT DICE: 15

THACO: 5

NO. OF ATTACKS: l
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 8d6

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Firetouch
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

 

SIZE: G (30' diam.)
MORALE: Champion (15)
XP VALUE: 12,000

Blazozoids resemble huge, white elmarin (see the Lorebook of the
Void in the SPELLIAMMER™ boxed set) or small comets of
creamy white flame. Their spherical bodies consist entirely of fi-
ery plasma gas, though they often drag a tail of blue fire behind
them when traveling at Spelljammer speeds,

Blazozoids are sentient balls of living energy with the ability to
communicate telepathically. They are always encountered in
wildspace, never on planets or in the phlogiston. Their fiery
bodies are so hot that they burn up any matter (including air and
water) that they contact (see the explanation of “firetouch” be-
low). In addition, their superheated bodies ignite any phlogiston
within a hundred feet of them. Should a blazozoid be foolish
enough to expose itself to the phlogiston ocean, the resulting ex-
plosion vaporizes everything within a mile, including the blazo-
zoid, (Affected characters must roll successful saving throws vs.
dragon breath to survive. Items and beings are thrown 1d10 miles
away from the center of the explosion and suffer 1d10 points of
damage for each mile thrown.)

Combat: Blazozoids usually ignore passing spelljammer ships un-
less bothered in some way. However, blazozoids do approach
ships when they want one of two things: either a ride through the
phlogiston or a meal. If the party refuses to give the blazozoid a
ride, or if it is searching for a meal, it attacks.

Blazozoids attack by ramming into their target, whether it is an
individual or an entire ship. The initial impact causes 8d6 points
of damage. The blazozoid then tries to remain in contact with the
target, using its firetouch to consume it. Any living victim
touched by a blazozoid must roll a successful saving throw vs.
breath weapon or burst into flames, suffering 5d6 points of dam-
age each round he remains in contact with the blazozoid. Those
attempting to escape a blazozoid's grasp must roll a successful
Dexterity check. Inanimate objects touched by a blazozoid must
roll a successful saving throw vs. magical fire or burst into
flames, suffering an additional 3d6 points of damage per round
until removed from contact with the blazozoid and the fire is ex-
tinguished.

Blazozoids are immune to fire damage, whether magical or
normal. In addition, any weapon that strikes a blazozoid and
fails a saving throw vs. normal fire is destroyed by the heat (al-
though the weapon still inflicts full damage). Weapons with a bo-

 

nus of +3 or more are immune to this effect. Cold-and
water-based attacks have their normal effects on blazozoids.

Habitat/Society: Blazozoids are the progeny of a huge, living star.
Like the blazozoids themselves, this star consists of living energy.
Unfortunately, this star, which refers to itself as “I,” does not rec-
ognize material beings as alive, much less intelligent. Therefore, it
believes itself to be the only sentient being in the universe, To de-
termine whether this is true, | has formed millions of emissaries
from its own body and dispatched them to the far ends of the uni-
verse in search of another living star.

The blazozoids are these emissaries. Although intelligent, they
are completely incapable of altering the basic beliefs that | im-
printed upon them at their creation. Therefore, they do not be-
lieve that material beings, such as the PCs, are truly intelligent
Instead, they view material beings as potential food sources, or,
at best, as a means of transport across the phlogiston,

Ecology: Blazozoids cannot reproduce and must be created from
I's body. They eat, or refuel, by turning matter into energy. Since
their bodies are made entirely of energy, a well-fed blazozoid may
be as much as 60 feet across, while one that has not eaten in some
time may be less than 10 feet across (a starving blazozoid also has
a slightly yellow tinge to its flame).

When encountered in the depths of wildspace (i.e., close to a
crystal sphere), a blazozoid is sure to want something from a
passing spelljammer ship—either to eat the ship and crew, or to
convince the pilots to take it to the next crystal sphere. Often, the
blazozoid will agree to perform some service in return for its pas-
sage. However, if some provision tor feeding the blazozoid dur-
ing the long journey is not made, it may turn on the crew after
reaching the next crystal sphere. To transport a blazozoid across
the phlogiston, the blazozoid must be completely encased in some
sort of flame-proof container, such as iron, stone, or force. Sim-
ply stowing them below decks will have disastrous effects when
the ship enters the phlogiston.
Chattur

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any space
FREQUENCY: Common
ORGANIZATION: Pack
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: B
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic good
NO. APPEARING: 2-24
ARMOR CLASS: 7
MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 1-1

THACO: 20

NO. OF ATTACKS: l
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4 (or by weapon)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: — Standard
SIZE: S (1'-2' tall)
MORALE: Average (10)
XP VALUE: 15

Chattur are small mammals that exhibit traits of both primates
and rodents. They are slender and quick and have very dexterous
front paws that are equipped with claw-tipped fingers and an op-
posable thumb. Their faces are wide and their eyes seem even
wider, with an innocent stare that many humans find very ap-
pealing. A band of black fur surrounds the eyes of these crea-
tures, much like the “mask” of raccoons. It is for this reason, and
not for any inherent sense of maliciousness, that chattur have
been dubbed “Space Bandits.”

They can be found living on many spacefaring vessels—often
without the knowledge of the crew. Usually their presence is tol-
erated when they are discovered—at least, if the discovery is
made by a neutral or good-aligned crew,

Superstitions about chattur abound. Their presence on a vessel
is supposed to bring good luck. Ill treatment of a chattur will re-
portedly rebound against the abuser at some future time. Most
significantly, if chattur are seen to be leaving a vessel, that is con-
sidered a dire warning about that vessel's immediate fate.

Chattur have their own language, which sounds much like the
chirping of excited chipmunks. Many of the adults have learned
to speak common from a lifetime of eavesdropping.

Combat: Not a very combative race, chattur fight only in defense
of their nests, kin, or friends. The combination of their claws and
bite accounts for the 1d4 points of damage. Chattur attempt to
trip opponents, wrap them in nets or rope, and otherwise harass
them during combat. They are ingenious at making the most of
their opportunities.

After some training, large chattur can learn to use short
swords, javelins (which they use as thrusting, not thrown, weap-
ons), or tiny crossbows (1d4 points of damage, range 3/6/9, one
bolt/round), Generally, about 20% of the chattur in a given den
are capable of this armed combat.

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Chattur do not gather in exceptionally large
communities; to find 100 together is very rare. However, their
clans and warrens can be found just about everywhere. They cen-
ter around a patriarch or matriarch. Sex roles are indistinguish-
able except for childbirth; the females share the ranks of the
trained fighters with the males in more or less equal numbers.

They are specialists at sneaking aboard ships and finding places
to live where they can remain undiscovered for weeks, months,
or years, They arrange very comfortable quarters, scavenging
whatever items they can from around the ship.

Though chattur can live on a crowded ship in the midst of great
activity, they rarely interfere with the operation of a vessel. This
is one reason their presence is tolerated so good-naturedly,
though their penchant for scavenging has brought them trouble
on more than one occasion.

Chattur often fall victim to the attacks of the malicious wry-
backs. While no single chattur is a match for a wryback, the chat-
tur's social structure enables them to band together. Often, a
chaotic wryback can be lured into a trap and dealt with by a
group of chattur.

Ecology: Chattur can thrive in all climes. They eat a variety of
foods and readily adapt to new diets and surroundings. They
have the ability to breed enough chattur to comfortably occupy
whatever living space they have, without overpopulating.

When a given warren is comfortably populated, pairs of young
adult chattur branch out on their own, trying to stow away
aboard a spacefaring vessel or find a sheltered den on a world or
asteroid,
Clockwork Horror

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Copper Silver Electrum Gold Platinum Adamantite

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any nonaquatic

FREQUENCY: Uncommon Rare Rare Very rare Unique Unique

ORGANIZATION: Race Race Race Race Race Race

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any Any Any Any Any

DIET: Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil

INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7) Average (8-10) Very (11-12) High (13-14) Exceptional Genius
(15-16) (17-18)

TREASURE: Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil

ALIGNMENT: Lawful Evil

NO. APPEARING: 2-20 1-10 1-6 1 1 1

ARMOR CLASS: 4 2 0 -2 -4 ~6

MOVEMENT: 9 9 9 9 9 9

HIT DICE: 2 3 4 5 6 7

THACO: 19 17 17 15 15 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 1 1 1 1 1

DAMAGPF/ATTACK: 1-4 1-6 1-8 1-10 1-12 1-20

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil Spring caster Steam caster Lightning rod _Lightningrod _ Disintegrate

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 10% 20% 30% 50% 70% 90%

SIZE: S (24" diam.)

MORALE: Fearless (20)

XP VALUE: 65 120 175 975 1,400 6,000

If one thinks of the crystal spheres as single cells in the body of the
cosmos, then one must certainly think of clockwork horrors as
viruses that have come to destroy that body.

Clockwork horrors are a form of arcane apparatus. They look
something like a mechanical spider (though they have only four
legs). While the body of the horror is only about two feet in diam-
eter, the legs give the creature an overall diameter of about four
feet. In the front of the body is a crystal that enables the horror to
see, Two depressions, one on each side of this lens, serve the hor-
ror as hearing organs. Two limbs (located roughly below the
hearing dishes) serve a number of purposes as described later.

The body of a clockwork horror is always cast as a single piece
from some type of metal. The most common type of horror is cre-
ated from copper, but others may be cast from gold, silver, elec-
trum, platinum, or even adamantite. The surface of the body is
always highly polished and covered with pulsating runes of mys-
tical power.

Clockwork horrors communicate with each other by means of
clicks, whirs, and similar mechanical sounds. The exact nature of
their language is unknown. It is believed, however, that the hor-
rors use a type of dot-and-dash code similar to that employed by
sailors and spelljammers when they signal each other with lights.

Combat: All clockwork horrors share the same defenses. They
are immune to all spells that depend on biological functions for
their effects. Examples of such spells include cause or cure
wounds, feign death, polymorph, and cloudkill. In addition, all
mind-affecting spells, such as charm, hypnotize, or fear, have no
effect on them. They can be affected only by those spells that
would have some power over nonliving objects. A shatter spell
directed at the horror’s seeing crystal will blind it for one round
per level of the caster. Similarly, a dispel magic paralyzes the hor-
ror for a like duration.

In addition, all horrors are immune to the effects of electricity
(magical or mundane). Cold and heat affect them normally, as do
all other types of spells.

 

 

 

 

 

Copper Horrors

The copper horror is the most commonly encountered horror.
While all of the other horrors have a built in weapon of some
type, the copper horror is not so equipped. Copper horrors serve
Clockwork Horror

as the menial work force of the race. The special appendages that
they use in their daily labors, however, can often be used in com-
bat with some success. When a copper horror is forced to engage
in melee, the mechanism is entitled to one attack that inflicts 1d4
points of damage. It should be noted, however, that the exact na-
ture of this attack may vary, depending on the task that the hor-
ror was assigned to.

Silver Horrors

The silver horror is somewhat less common than its copper kin,
but far more dangerous, The silver horror is the warrior of the
race, It is often encountered as a patrol or guard at work sites or
in horror-dominated regions.

The right manipulator arm of the silver horror is fashioned to
serve a dual purpose. In addition to enabling it to grasp and han-
dle objects in the manner of a human hand, it can present sharp
blades for combat. Once extended, these spin at high speed, turn-
ing the manipulator into a deadly rotating saw that strikes for 1d6
points of damage.

The silver horror has a missile weapon as well. Where the cop-
per horrors have a secondary manipulator arm, the silver horrors
have a hollow black tube. Known as the spring caster, this
weapon is a clockwork-driven device that can eject a barbed dart
at high velocity. The dart has ranges of 1/2/4 and inflicts 1d3
points of damage. The rate of fire is one per round.

Electrum Horrors

The electrum horror fills the role of commanding officer or over-
seer, It is often found heading patrols of silver horrors or directing
the operations of a large number of copper horrors.

The electrum horror is equipped with the same combination
manipulator/razor saw that is found on the silver horror. How-
ever, the electrum razor saw is sharper and more dangerous than
those cast of silver. Thus, an electrum razor saw that strikes in
combat inflicts 1d8 points of damage.

Where the silver horror has its spring caster, however, the elec-
trum horror has the steam caster. The steam caster uses a jet of
high pressure steam to fire its missiles. As with the spring caster,
the rate of fire is but one per round. The range of the steam cast-
er's darts is 2/4/8 and the damage inflicted by each hit is 2d4
points.

Gold Horrors

The gold horror is a high-ranking member of the horror social
structure. As a rule, there is only one gold horror to a planet, and
its task is the direction of all horror operations on that world. In
addition to its keen intelligence, the gold horror's combat capabil-
ities make it more than able to carry out its mission.

The gold horror’s razor saw is one of the sharpest cutting de-
vices known. In combat, it inflicts 1d10 points of damage. The
gold's second arm is a black tube known as the lightning rod.
Once every other combat round, the rod can unleash a stroke of
lightning that functions just as the spell of that name and inflicts
3d6 points of damage. A saving throw vs. spell is allowed for half
damage.

Platinum Horrors

There is hardly ever more than one platinum horror in any given
crystal sphere. Where the golds direct the actions of the lesser
horrors, the platinum directs the golds.

The weapons of the platinum horror are the same as those of
the gold horror: the razor saw and lightning rod, However, the
platinum razor saw inflicts 1d12 points of damage and the light-
ning rod causes 4d8 points of damage (and it can fire every
round), A saving throw vs. spell is permitted for half damage.

Adamantite Horror

The so-called “father” of the clockwork horror race, there is but
one adamantite horror known to exist. A cold and calculating en-
tity, the adamantite horror is fond of intricate strategies and devi-
ous planning.

When drawn into actual combat, a rare occurrence, the ada-
mantite horror is far from helpless. As its first line of defense, the
adamantite horror has its trusty razor saw. Even more dangerous
than that of the platinum horror, the adamantite razor saw in-
flicts 1d20 points of damage with each successful attack.

The adamantite horror has no lightning rod, but it wields a
weapon known as the nightmare stick. Each round, the night-
mare stick is able to function as a disintegrate spell with a 50-yard
range. A saving throw vs. spell is allowed to avoid the deadly ef-
fect of the nightmare stick.

Habitat/Society: The wisest sages tell us of an ancient humanoid
race known only as “the Lost Ones.” Records of their origins have
long since faded, but frightening tales are still told of their demise.

The lost ones were fond of mechanisms. The more subtle and
clever their devices, the better they liked them. In the end, how-
ever, their own love of such toys brought them down, One of
their most brilliant artificers built a magnificent adamantite ma-
chine with workings so advanced that none but he could fathom
its operation. In addition, he wove powerful spells about the con-
traption, bestowing upon it intelligence and mystical abilities. In
gratitude for its creation, the adamantite machine destroyed him.

Over the course of the next few decades, the adamantite horror
built an army of mechanical followers, each in its own image but
of lesser quality. As the horrors rose to power in their sphere, they
eliminated all life in it. In the end, they tore apart the worlds in
their sphere and used the raw materials thus obtained to build
more and more horrors.

Centuries passed with the horrors contained in the sphere of
the Lost Ones. They would have been forever doomed to remain
in their original sphere had they not been visited by a fleet of
neogi deathspiders. The neogi had come seeking slaves and “cat-
tle” to feast upon. Instead, they found death. One by one, their
ships were taken from them. In the end, the neogi and their slaves
found themselves forced into the lifejammers.

Now able to journey between the crystal spheres, the clock-
work horrors began to spread, Each crystal sphere they encoun-
tered was violated and the worlds within it plundered. For those
living in these doomed spheres, there was no escape.

The society of the clockwork horrors, if one can call it that, isa
very rigid, almost military one. Horrors have no individual iden-
tities. Rather, they have a mission: the race must survive.

Once the horrors have established a foothold on a world, they
see all living things on that world as a threat. Logically, to the hor-
rors, such creatures must be removed—and removal of living
creatures is something that clockwork horrors are experts at.

Ecology: Because the clockwork horrors are not natural crea-
tures, they have no place in the ecology of the worlds they visit.
However, they make radical changes in those worlds.

A clockwork horror fleet (which almost always consists of
10d10 captured neogi ships) leaves the worlds it visits stripped of
all their natural resources, Metals are strip-mined, living things
are removed as useless and troublesome, and everything that can
be exploited is drained away. This process takes only two or three
centuries.

The powerful weapons of the clockwork horrors are highly
prized by most artificers. While they do not retain their powers
after removal from the horror, they are interesting to study.
Colossus

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Wildspace

FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary or clan
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Herbivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low to average (5-10)
TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Any chaotic

NO, APPEARING: 1 or 1-6

ARMOR CLASS: 10

MOVEMENT: 48, Fl 24 (EB)

HIT DICE: 35

THACO: 5

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 every 2 rounds
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 50-100 (or 5-10 hull points)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Stunning clap, throw boulders

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

 

SIZE: G (60" tall)
MORALE: Unsteady (6)
XP VALUE: 27,000

These dim-witted giants are 60 feet tall and weigh 70 tons. Al-
though not related to the giants of the known worlds, they are
basically humanoid.

Compared to human proportions, their heads are too small and
their legs are too short. Their features tend to be thick and bul-
bous. Their foreheads slope back sharply and their noses are
round blobs of flesh. Their teeth are rarely straight and always
have jagged edges. Their fingers are stubby and thick, completely
unsuited for delicate manipulations. A colossus can have any
color eyes and hair, but black is the most common. Their voices
are like rolling thunder, understandable but slow and deep.

Colossi wear heavy, coarse clothes—usually a tunic, breeches,
and sandals. Crude though it is, the tailoring is much too fine for
any colossus to have stitched it. The clothes can be almost any
color, with no regard to fashion sense. It is not uncommon to find
large patches covering rips and tears. Colossi never carry weap-
ons or armor, though they could if they wanted to.

Combat: Compared to a human, a colossus moves slowly and
ponderously. As a result, its great movement rate is only a third
of what its 30-foot stride would normally indicate.

Its THACO is much worse than one would expect because of its
slow movement. In fact, it can attack only once every other
round with either a fist punch or a foot stomp. In addition, crea-
tures under 25 feet tall get a -2 Armor Class bonus and those un-
der 10 feet tall get a -4 Armor Class bonus.

But when a colossus manages to hit, the victim must roll a sav-
ing throw vs. death magic (failure means death), in addition to
the damage done (see pg. 75 in the DMG). Any blow can cause
structural damage, Smashing and blunt weapons have no effect
whatsoever.

A colossus can clap its hands together with great force and
cause a stunning vibration. This is akin to being right next to an
explosion. The clap has a range of 60 feet and causes anyone
within that range to roll a saving throw vs. paralyzation; failure
means the victim is stunned for 1d3 rounds. All characters in the
radius of effect are automatically deaf for 1d6 turns.

A colossus can throw boulders up to 500 yards for 5d10 points
of damage, but its aim is so poor that it rarely hits what it aims at.

In wildspace, a colossus is big enough to be its own ship. In-
deed, it has the same air volume as a 15-ton ship. It consumes as

    
  

 

wm 5:

 

 

much air as a full crew of 10. The colossus can coast through
space for months without running out of air.

Food and water can be a problem, though. A colossus cannot
propel itself through wildspace except by making a leap from a
solid surface, which means it is very slow moving under its own
power. It would be possible to fix a spelljamming helm to it and
make it into a spelljamming speed “ship” of maneuverability class
E. Its plane of gravity makes its back or stomach the walking sur-
Face.

Habitat/Society: In wildspace these simple creatures are encoun-
tered singly. They are usually lost wanderers. They talk about a
home called Arhoad, assumed to be a planet. This mythical place
has never be found, and the colossi are never able to describe how
to find it or how they became lost. It is one of the great mysteries
of wildspace.

They speak of close families on Arhoad, so it is assumed that
they have a clan society. Since they could not possibly have made
their own clothing, many scholars assume that they are the
worker or slave class of yet another race, although there is no evi-
dence to support this theory. The reigarEcology accept responsi-
bility for the colossi’s plight.

The good colossi are quite friendly and helpful to travelers.
The evil ones are marauders and killers, destroying property for
the sheer joy of it, Neither variety is considered to be very smart.
The only long-term goal they have is to find Arhoad. However,
they never seem to know how to go about doing it.

Ecology: No one has ever seen a sick colossus or seen one die
from anything other than injuries. While they are known to have
two sexes, children have never been seen. They do not seem to
age, at least not in the few hundred years they have been in
known space. They can eat virtually any type of plant. The evil
ones eat meat, but they do not seem to need it in their diets. It is
assumed that they do it only for the terrorizing effect.
Delphinid

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Phlogiston flow
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: School
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic good
NO. APPEARING: 2-12
ARMOR CLASS: 6
MOVEMENT: 21

HIT DICE: 3+3
THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: L (9' long)
MORALE: Average (9)
XP VALUE: 120

These friendly beasts swim harmlessly through the phlogiston.
They have on occasion been known to help stranded travelers. A
delphinid has a fish-shaped body with trilateral symmetry, with
everything found in triplicate. The head tapers to a blunt nose.
There are three eyes placed equidistantly around the head. The
mouth has three jaws, all of which are hinged. There are three
large dorsal fins equidistantly around the large, central part of the
body. The tail has three fins as well.

Delphinids can change color to match the swirling phlogiston.
They can make multi-colored swirls and streamers across their
hide. A dead delphinid is a pale grey color. They have been
known to intentionally turn grey, black, or white in order to be
seen by passing sailors.

Combat: A delphinid can attack only by ramming (its teeth are
too small to be used effectively as weapons). A delphinid can ram
every other round. Each ram inflicts 1d6 points of damage. Any
creature that weighs less than the delphinid must roll a successful
Dexterity check or be knocked down (or off, or over, or what-
ever).

Delphinids rarely initiate combat. They attack only to protect
themselves or their friends. They are smart enough to be creative
in their strategies and tactics. They can be taught tricks or maneu-
vers quite easily.

Habitat/Society: Delphinids are found only in the phlogiston cur-
rents. They are usually found swimming with the current, not
against it. Since they cannot travel at spelljamming speeds, they
are encountered only by ships that are at rest or traveling at tacti-
cal speeds.

Delphinids are quite friendly. They will play and cavort with
sailors. They are dexterous enough that they can dive into a ship's
gravity, keep control of their trajectory, and make it back out.

 

 

Any aggressive behavior or attempt to hurt or dominate a
delphinid causes the entire school to vanish into the flow.

If a sailor falls off a deck, delphinids have been known to carry
him back to the ship. If they are feeling particularly frisky, they
may even give a sailor a joy ride. The sight of a school of
delphinids can do wonders for the morale of a crew that has been
in space too long.

Each delphinid has its own personality. While they travel to-
gether in a school, there does not appear to be a leader. Each
delphinid does as it pleases. The group tends to follow the one
with the idea of the moment. They like elves, humans, gnomes,
halflings, kender, and other fun-loving races. They avoid behold-
ers, mind flayers, neogi, lizard men, and other aggressive races.
They are neutral toward dwarves, the arcane, giff, dacon, and
such.

Ecology: Delphinids somehow get their nourishment from phlo-
giston. They like various treats that sailors are fond of throwing
to them. In particular they like fruit of any sort. Unfortunately
for them, fruit is a rare commodity aboard a spelljamming ship.

Delphinid young are born live, witha single calf per birth. Both
parents raise the calf until it is old enough to defend itself. Once
the calf has left its parents, they part ways as well. Delphinids do
not mate for life.

Delphinid flesh is sweet and tender. The neogi consider it a deli-
cacy. Most good or neutrally aligned human sailors consider it
bad luck to kill a delphinid.
Dizantar

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any space
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Unknown
INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (15-16)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: -3
MOVEMENT: 15

HIT DICE: 8

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: l
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 7-16 (halberd)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spiked armor
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Dimension door
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 20%

SIZE: L (8' tall)
MORALE: Fearless (20)
XP VALUE: 5,000

Dizantar are tall, armored humanoids that spend most of their
time hunting down and killing arcane.

These creatures are always encountered in silvery, heavy plate
mail of special construction with smooth, tightly fitting joints.
The rest of the armor is covered with spikes and razor-sharp
edges. No part of the body is left visible. Even the eye slits show
only black, like the depths of wildspace. Despite the weight of
this armor, dizantar move quickly, silently, and with great agility.
Their voices are soft and whispery. They speak common, but
most have their own language as well.

There is no recorded account of what a dizantar's body looks
like. When the armor is opened, all that is found is smoking black
ashes. Their extreme height and three fingered gauntlets lead
most sages to the conclusion that they are not human.

Combat: The only weapon dizantar have ever been seen with is a
ten-foot-long halberd with an unusually ornate head and a metal
shaft. They wield it with a Strength of 18/00, giving them a +3
bonus to the attack roll and +6 damage bonus. This weapon can
harm creatures that can be hit only by +1 magical weapons or
better. Both the halberd and the armor glow when subjected to a
detect magic spell.

If need be, a dizantar can use the spikes and edges on its armor
to cause damage. Any punch inflicts 1d6 points of damage from
the spikes and edges. Anyone attempting to wrestle or grapple
with a dizantar suffers 1d6 points of damage. Ropes and other
bindings cast about a dizantar are severed in a single round. The
armor also provides a 20% resistance to all forms of magic.

A dizantar can use the halberd to cast a glowing, magical line.
The motion is similar to that of a fly-casting fisherman. If the at-
tack roll is successful, the line is magically fixed to the victim.
Only a wish spell can remove it. No damage is caused by the line,
but the dizantar can follow the line to the victim anywhere within
acrystal sphere. The line is severed by passing through the sphere
wall or by any form of planar travel.

 

 

 

 

 

A dizantar can use only those miscellaneous magical items not
specific to a player character class. It can do so only if the item is
specifically needed for its quest. The item is discarded carelessly
as soon as it is no longer useful. A dizantar can use a dimension
door spell up to three times a day, but only in wildspace. It can de-
tect invisible and see through illusions at all times.

Habitat/Society: Dizantar can be found anywhere in space or on
any planet. The location and nature of their native crystal sphere
is a mystery. They are at home in space for short periods of time,
apparently protected by their armor. A dizantar will frequently
commandeer a spelljamming ship to search out its victim. They
do not build their own ships.

Dizantar are always found alone. They deal with weaker be-
ings only if this serves their purposes. More often they take what
they need, unaffected by the resulting death or destruction. They
may work with more powerful creatures toward a common goal,
but they prefer not to. Dizantar are cold, calculating, fearless,
and not bothered by morals or ethics. Only two things motivate
dizantar—revenge and hunting arcane. Dizantar kill arcane on
sight. They spend most of their time hunting down members of
this race and killing them. Fortunately, dizantar are far less nu-
merous than the masters of the spelljamming helms. Occasionally
dizantar are encountered on missions of vengeance against other
creatures.

Ecology: If dizantar eat, they always make sure to do it out of
sight of “lesser” creatures. The arcane fear them greatly.
Strangely, the arcane refuse to talk much about dizantar. Any ru-
mor of a dizantar in the area is cause for an arcane to vanish or
immediately hire a squad of bodyguards.
Esthetic

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any space

FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary (symbiont with reigar)
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Special

INTELLIGENCE: None (symbiont)
TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 0

MOVEMENT: Fl 50 (B)

HIT DICE: 20-100 hull points
THACO: 5

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2

DAMAGE/ATTACK: See below

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Jammerscream, grappling
SPECIAL DEFENSES: None

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: G
MORALE: Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 10,000 max

An esthetic is a biological, symbiotic creation of the reigar; it is
used for transportation. It is essentially a living craft, capable of
self-sustenance for unlimited time. It has no intelligence of its
own, being totally reliant on its host, the reigar who created it.

Each esthetic is different from all the others—a direct result of
the personality of the creator. The only common thread is the ex-
tremely ornate nature of the vessels. Esthetics may be bilaterally
symmetrical (two halves matching, like a human body divided
from head to feet), radially symmetrical (like a starfish), or they
may have no discernible symmetry.

Combat: Tactics vary because of the individual nature of each es-
thetic, but the basic attack is to immobilize the prey, generally us-
ing a jammerscream attack (a spell-like ability innate to each
esthetic). The creature then closes with the victim, grapples, and
then drives a hollow boarding spike (6d10 points of damage due
to size) into the hapless victim. In the case of animal victims, the
spike can be used to inject a digestive enzyme (full damage 2d12
per round, successful saving throw vs. breath weapon for half
damage) that breaks down the opponent's tissues for use by the
esthetic. This attack can also be used against ships, in which case
the spike opens to disgorge boarding parties of helots and lakshu
attack troops, (See entry on Lakshu for more detail.)

A jammerscream attack has a range of 2,500 yards; it affects
one spelljammer. This attack form seeks out and neutralizes the
energy flow necessary for spelljamming. In the case of space-
going animals and humanoid spelljammers, the effects range
from a temporary cessation of spelljamming ability (similar to a
migraine, spelljamming ability lost for 3d6 turns) to cerebral
hemorrhage (the latter in the case of a failed saving throw vs.
spell) leading to death or at least permanent brain damage. In the
case of dwarven forges, a successful strike causes forge flames to
expire and shovelers to writhe on the floor, grasping their heads
in pain. (Note that the jammerscream is not a spell and is not
available to characters.)

Habitat/Society: Esthetics have been the reigar's homes since the
destruction of the reigar's planet in the Master Stroke. When the
loss of their homeworld necessitated a new habitat, the reigar
leaped at the opportunity to combine their pursuits of artistic per-
fection, their desire for ultimate personal expression, and their

 

need for new homes. Centuries of experimentation led eventually
to the birth of the esthetics.

The esthetic protects itself from boarding action by not making
obvious doors or hatches. Entry is granted by means of permea-
ble membranes in and around the esthetic’s body. Since the reigar
and its creation are in a symbiotic relationship, the reigar can al-
ways enter or leave at will. However, non-reigar accompanying
the creator may not be allowed this freedom, unless the reigar
specifically grants it. If the reigar is off-ship for long periods, the
esthetic operates according to a set of instructions given to it by
its creator. Normal instructions include things like “Don’t let in
any strangers” and “Stay within 100 yards of this dock.”

Should a reigar die, go insane, sink into a depression, or other-
wise lose its normal mental acuity, the esthetic reflects this change
in mental state by physically altering its appearance (e.g., rotting,
developing spiked flanges, blades, etc.) and quite often acquiring
a stronger personality of its own.

An esthetic can travel as fast as the fastest vessel known in
space (SR 7)—some say even faster. The motive force is un-
known, but it is thought to be at least partially provided by the
conscious actions of the esthetic itself.

Ecology: Esthetics neither take from nor contribute to their sur-
roundings, being totally self-sufficient creations. One theory
states that esthetics absorb energy via photosynthesis. Another
proposes that they are able to absorb particles from the atmos-
phere surrounding them and convert these into nutrients.

Esthetics cannot move into the phlogiston, thereby effectively
stranding the reigar inside a crystal sphere (and providing a rea-
son for that reigar to approach a likely party for aid). How, then,
do they get from one crystal sphere to another? Again, the leg-
ends take over. It is said that there are bases—giant, floating, and
ornate, geometric in an alien sense (i.e., completely
asymmetrical)—that can hold groups of reigar and their esthetics.
These are purported to be able to teleport from sphere to sphere,
carrying their contents with them.
Focoid

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Deep space, near bright stars
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Constant

DIET: Carnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)

TREASURE: QO

ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO, APPEARING: l

ARMOR CLASS: 0

MOVEMENT: 24 —
HIT DICE: 6+3

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-12/1-12/1-12

SPECIAL ATTACKS: None
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Partial invisibility

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

 

SIZE: L (9)' long)
MORALE: Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 1,400

Focoids are a severe navigational hazard near the brighter stars of
the Known Sphere. They manipulate their gelatinous bodies into
lenses, focusing intense light on any object they choose, thus
roasting enemies and lighting rigging and decks on fire almost at
will. In many ports, adventurers can receive bounties, up to 500
gp, for every focoid carcass they bring in.

Focoids consist of three clear gelatin spheres that are joined
into a short chain, They are so close to transparent that they are
difficult to see unless they are moving against the star field behind
them, in which case the refraction of starlight gives the observer a
vague notion of where they are. They are especially difficult to
see when between the observer and a bright star, not surprisingly
the focoid's favorite position of attack.

There is a small mouth at one end of a focoid. Until its last meal
is completely digested, the food can be seen through the creature,
temporarily rendering it visible.

Each spherical section of a focoid’s body can be manipulated
into various shapes, In its combat posture, the spheres are flat-
tened into lenses. At other times the body sections may be elon-
gated, squashed, or left as spheres. These shape variations may
indicate some kind of communication or mood changes.

Combat: A focoid’s mouth is completely unsuited for combat.
The creature's only means of attack is by focusing light through
its lens-shaped body sections. Obviously, a focoid must have a
bright source of light in order to attack. It is therefore seldom
found away from fire bodies. On the rare occasions that a focoid
does travel in deep space, it cannot attack and therefore most
likely goes unnoticed.

Each of the focoid's three body sections can become a lens and
can fire at a separate target. Each has five hexes (2,500 yards)
range, and inflicts 1d12 points (1-2 hull points) of damage. Each
section can fire once per round.

 

 

 

Neither a focoid nor the tocused beams of light it fires are easily
seen. A typical encounter with a focoid opens as the creature at-
tacks for one or more rounds while the confused targets attempt
to get a handle on its position. All missile attacks against a focoid
suffer a —3 penalty to the attack roll. Melee attacks are not af-
fected, since a focoid is relatively easy to see close up.

A focoid can use its light-focusing weapon only when it is be-
tween a star and the target. If it is maneuvered out of position, it
cannot fire. The focoid then usually evaluates the situation, mov-
ing off if the odds are against it, pressing the attack if it thinks it
can get a meal. In either case, a focoid out of position is not firing
and is, therefore, impossible to locate visually.

Habitat/Society: Focoids are creatures of space—living, breeding,
and dying there. They are never encountered in groups. Focoids
have apparently not discovered the advantages of cooperative
hunting. They attack only to acquire food—they have no ani-
mosity toward any particular race. However, most other space-
faring races have tremendous animosity toward focoids, since
these creatures are a menace to navigation.

Ecology: A focoid is unisexual, though reproduction requires the
union of three adults. Each grows a new gelatin sphere and the
three are joined to create a new individual. Once the new focoid is
born, all participating focoids disperse. They eat meat and attack
only to obtain food.
Fractine

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any space
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Always
DIET: Light and magic
INTELLIGENCE: Unknown
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1
ARMOR CLASS: -1
MOVEMENT: Fl 1 to 24 (A)
HIT DICE: 6-13
THACO: 6 HD: 15

7-8 HD: 13

9-10 HD: 11

11-12 HD: 9

13 HD: 7
NO. OF ATTACKS: Area of effect (1 sq. ft. per HD)
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-8
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 25 %
SIZE: H (1 sq. ft. per HD)

Fearless (20)
6 HD: 2,000 (+1,000 per additional
HD)

MORALE:
XP VALUE:

Fractines appear as two-dimensional, mirrored, trapezoidal
planes, When at rest, fractines resemble vast mirrors and can be
manipulated to function as excellent scrying mirrors. To do so, a
spelljamming scholar must focus his willpower on the subject he
wishes to view, while touching a fractine. A Wisdom check (mod-
ified by a DM-selected difficulty penalty of — 1 to — 10) must suc-
ceed to view the subject. Failure results in 1d10 turns of
exhaustion and a 10% chance that the fractine is stirred into mo-
tion, One can examine a subject's past, future, and weaknesses
using the right techniques. However, the fractine’s distorted sur-
face may blur the results, obscuring crucial information.

Fractines are most commonly encountered in space in an active
state, tumbling or folding and refolding like a piece of origami.
They react to a variety of stimuli. They are attracted to motion,
loud sounds, and magical energy. However, large bursts of en-
ergy (such as a fireball or lightning bolt) repulse fractines for 1d4
rounds, Spells affecting air can be used to control fractines. (The
caster must roll a successful saving throw vs. spell each round or
lose control.)

Combat: A fractine causes a variety of harmful, distortional ef-
fects, Physical attacks may be used to destroy or alter its course,
but only silver or magical weapons or spells cause any damage.
Furthermore, a fractine must be struck on one of its two faces to
cause any damage.

Any physical damage to a fractine causes damage to the at-
tacker. The attacker suffers 1d4x25% of the inflicted damage
(round fractions up), though he receives a saving throw vs, petri-
fication to suffer only half damage.

Once per round there is a 1% chance per point of damage in-
flicted that a fractine shatter into 1d4 independent fragments,
each with one-third of the remaining HD and hp (shattering re-
leases any held creatures),

A fractine receives a saving throw vs. any magical effect, if the
effect gets past its magic resistance. If the saving throw is success-
ful, the magical effect is redirected at random.

 

 

 

 

A fractine attacks by falling on its targets. The fractine passes
through its victims, causing 2d4 points of damage and forcing a
saving throw vs. breath weapon to avoid a special effect. If the
saving throw fails, roll 1d20 for the effect.

1-3 =Blink (random direction and orientation)

4-5 = Teleport (1d4x10 feet into air)

6-7 =Deport* (Character's mind views his body from another
plane; must roll Wisdom checks each round to control)

8-9 = Turn Ethereal* (Able to cast magic only, intangible)

10-12 = Distortion* (Character’s form suffers a distortion, DM‘s
choice—Effects may shorten or lengthen limbs, make fat
or thin, flatten, stretch, etc. A Dexterity check must suc-
ceed each round to perform an desired actions.

13. =Transpose* (Part of body is exchanged with that of an-
other victim, or it vanishes. Roll an Intelligence check to
control body part.)

14 =Reversed* (Any action the character takes becomes re-
versed)

15 =Duplication** (Creates a duplicate of character; dupli-
cate attacks)

16-20 = Trap (As a mirror of life trapping; there is a 25% chance
that another creature is released at the same time)

" Effect lasts 1d4 rounds.
** Effect lasts 2d4 +2 rounds.

Habitat/Society: It is not known whether fractines are intelligent
creatures or merely spatial phenomena. Shattered fragments ei-
ther follow divergent paths or merge once again.

Ecology: Fractines consume life, light, and darkness magical en-
ergy. Each level, Hit Dice, spell level, and bonus provides 1 point
of food. When a fractine has consumed a number of points equal
to its total hit points, it leaves. Its movement rate is increased by 1
per point of light consumed and decreased by 1 per point of dark-
ness (maximum of 24 and minimum of 1).

 
Giant, Spacesea

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Wildspace

FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Tribal/ship

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: High (13-14)

TREASURE: W (F)

ALIGNMENT: Neutral good

NO. APPEARING: 11-20

ARMOR CLASS: 0

MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 14+1d4

THACO: 7

NO. OF ATTACKS: ]

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-10 or by weapon (10-20)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Hurling rocks for 3-30, or 1-3 hull

points
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

 

SIZE: H (18’ tall)
MORALE: Champion (16)
XP VALUE: 8,000

Spacesea giants, or rover giants, are an offshoot of the ground-
ling stone giant race that has found its way into arcane space. The
ancestors of these giants were brought to space as neogi slaves,
but they eventually managed to escape.

Spacesea giants have hair, unlike their land-locked brethren.
They exult in this, often growing their hair (and the males’
beards) to resemble that of their god, Ptah.

Combat: When battling from aboard their stone ships (see be-
low), the giants prefer to engage in missile combat. Their ships’
ballistae and their own rock-hurling abilities give them a potent
missile attack. They can hurl their boulders with a range of 500
yards (1 hex), causing 3d10 points of damage or 1d3 points of hull
damage per hit. All giant ships have a store of boulders for hurl-
ing and ship repair (see below).

When engaged in melee, spacesea giants use either great stone
clubs or maces (2d6+8) or strike with a fist for 1d10 points of
damage or 1 point of hull damage per hit.

Habitat/Society: The first giants that escaped the neogi embraced
the god Ptah, and they pleaded to him for aid. Ptah responded,
granting them heightened intelligence, curiosity, and wisdom. In
return for his aid, Ptah asked that the giants roam arcane space,
to learn of its immensity and to appreciate its creator, their bene-
factor. The giants agreed, and they now rove far and wide
throughout the spheres, learning and worshiping. As their intelli-
gence has increased, so has their appreciation of art, as seen on
the hulls and sails of their ships.

Almost all spacesea giants worship Ptah and devote their lives
to the exploration of arcane space, with particular attention to
wildspace. Many giants capitalize on this drive by hiring out as
explorers, escorts, or scouts for other, non-evil races. Some giants
make their living as merchants. Their large, sturdy ships excel in
this capacity. Also, most pirates hesitate (to say the least) to at-
tack a giant ship.

Giants can use, at least temporarily, any ship that can be modi-
fied to accept their bulk, but they prefer to use ships of their own
construction. These resemble huge groundling galleons, made of
solid stone. The ship's statistics are as follows:

 

 

Spacesea Giant Galleon

Built by: Spacesea Giants Saves As: Thick stone
Used by: Spacesea Giants Power Type: Major or Minor
helm

Tonnage: 60 tons Ship's Rating: As for helmsman
Crew: 11-20 Giants Standard

Armament: Various ballistae
Maneuver Class; E Cargo: 30 tons
Landing—Land: No Keel Length: 200"
Landing—Water: Yes (it floats!) Beam Length: 50"

 

Armor Rating: 3

These ships are larger than a normal galleon to allow for the gi-
ants’ greater size, Like their groundling ancestors, spacesea giants
feel more comfortable with a large mass of stone surrounding
them. With the above exceptions, spacesea galleons are not much
different from others of their type.

Along with their intelligence increase, the frequency of elders
and magic-using giants has gone up. For every ten giants, one is
an elder who is able to use stone shape, stone tell, and transmute
rock to mud spells, once per day, as a 7th-level mage. Of these el-
ders, 50% can cast wizard or priest spells as 5th-level spellcasters.
It is these elders who man the helm; the oldest is most often the
ship's captain. They can also use their magical abilities, and the
ever-present boulders, to repair hull damage to their ships. Each
boulder yields enough material to repair 1d4 points of hull or
mast (but not rigging) damage. None of these magical powers are
usable in the phlogiston.

Ecology: The main weakness of the spacesea giants is their need for
air, and this is the reason the giants seldom venture into the phlogis-
ton. To this end, most giant ships carry a garden of green plants to
help replenish the air supply. These plants also serve as food for the
giants and the 1d4 giant goats each ship carries for dairy products
(the goats also serve as convenient garbage disposals).
Golem, Furnace

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 2
MOVEMENT: 6 (see below when spelljamming)
HIT DICE: 20 (90 hp)
THACO: 5

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: See below
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil (but see below)
SIZE: L (12' tall)
MORALE: Fearless (19-20)
XP VALUE: 18,000

The furnace golem is a specialized form of iron golem that weighs
6,000 Ibs. It is otherwise like its cousin in appearance. Furnace go-
lems are created without weapons, but they can pick up and use
any giant-size device that they can grasp.

Furnace golems are intelligent, speaking in slow, measured,
booming voices that lack all inflection and tone. Their mouths
open and close, having hinged jaws, and when they speak on-
lookers can see a fiery glow within their mouths. Furnace golems
are warm to the touch but give off no odor. Their eyes give off a
dull red glow, as if heated from within. Furnace golems move
with ponderous gaits that can crush floors and shake whole build-
ings, except when they are on thick rock foundations.

Furthermore, furnace golems are capable of spelljamming by
consuming magical items, which they place in their mouths to be
destroyed by the magical, molten material within them. For every
1,000 XP that a consumed magical item is worth, the golem can
spelljam for one week (tonnage = '/10 ton; SR 2; MC B). Only
one item is consumed at a time, avoiding any chance of an inter-
nal explosion as might occur in normal furnaces. Furnace golems
do not leave the crystal spheres in which they are found; they ex-
plode should they enter the phlogiston (300'-radius fireball caus-
ing 36d6 points of damage to all within the radius). A human
carried along by a furnace golem into wildspace has enough air
for 2d6+7 days, thanks to the golem’s size.

Combat: Because of their intelligence, furnace golems are more
versatile than iron golems in combat. A furnace golem may pick
up a large, solid weapon (anything from a tree trunk to a giant's
axe) and swing it at an opponent, gaining normal initiative and
causing triple the damage that a human would do with a similar
(man-sized) weapon, plus the damage bonus for having storm gi-
ant strength (+12 points). A blow from its fist causes 2d6 +12
points of damage. The furnace golem may pick up and hurl boul-
ders or similar objects up to 300 yards, inflicting 3d10 points of
damage per rock; however, it can catch rocks and similar hurled
objects only 10% of the time.

A furnace golem can also grasp a man-size or smaller opponent
and crush him in its mighty fingers. The opponent suffers 6d6
points of damage per round, and the golem need make no further
attack rolls after the first round, The golem cannot crush an op-
ponent and fight other foes in the same round, but it can hold an

 

opponent tightly, preventing his escape, and either fight with its
free hand or catch a second victim and crush them both at the
same time. The golem releases crushed victims when they stop
struggling and appear to be dead.

Because of its size and strength, a furnace golem may crush and
batter furniture, walls, carts, fences, buildings, etc. A blow from
this golem’s fist is as effective against structures as a ram with a
+1 bonus, as given on Table 52 in the 2nd Edition Dungeon Mas-
ters Guide, page 76, The golem is equally effective if it can grasp
the object and exert force against it, tearing it apart or crushing it.
In any situation, consider the golem's mass and strength when
lifting, throwing, resisting, or breaking objects.

A furnace golem is immune to all weapons but those of +3 or
greater enchantment. Magical cold attacks slow it for three
rounds, and magical fire attacks repair 2 points of damage per hit
die of damage the attack would have caused. All other spells are
ineffective. Rust monster attacks affect a furnace golem, but com-
plete destruction of the golem releases the magical molten iron
within it, creating a 60-foot-diameter pool that causes 6d10 points
of damage per round to all within it and lasts for 1d4+4 turns.

Habitat/Society: These creatures are animated by powerful, intelli-
gent spirits conjured up by their creators and bound to the material
form of the golems. They are servitors of their creators, having no
true society or habitat. The creator of a furnace golem may hold a
conversation with it, learning what the golem has seen and heard
recently (these being its only two senses), The golem can even offer
minor speculations on events of which it is aware. Such conversa-
tion is not profound and lacks imagination, but the golem never
lies and always tries to use logic. It may even converse with others
who encounter it, though this does not hamper its attacks if such
seem warranted, Furnace golems can carry out fairly complex in-
structions as could normal, willing human servants of good intelli-
gence. They never rebel against their masters.

Ecology: Furnace golems play no part in any living ecology. Fur-
nace golems neither eat nor sleep.
Golem, Radiant

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any
FREQUENCY: Unique
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral (good)
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 1
MOVEMENT: 6

HIT DICE: 20 (90 hp)
THACO: 5

NO, OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 6-60
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Death aura
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below
SIZE: L (15’ tall)
MORALE: Fearless (19-20)
XP VALUE: Special

The radiant golem is a unique creature that some claim is as old as
the races of elves, gnomes, and dwarves.

In physical appearance, the radiant golem looks much like an
iron golem. It stands somewhat taller, reaching a height of 15 feet
and weighing roughly 6,000 pounds, It has been formed in the im-
age of a powerfully built man with eyes that burn with a cool,
blue light. The black body of the creature scintillates with an
azure aura that fills the area around the creature with a smell of
summer lightning.

The radiant golem is able to speak with almost any creature it
meets via an innate telepathic power. This ability transcends lin-
guistic barriers and falters only when the golem is attempting to
communicate with truly unusual creatures, such as cloakers or
clockwork horrors.

Combat: The radiant golem is even more deadly than its iron
cousins, Were it not for the fact that the creature abhors violence
in any form, it would certainly be among the most deadly mon-
sters known in any crystal sphere.

In melee, a single blow from its mighty fist inflicts 6d10 points
of damage. For the purposes of lifting and breaking objects, the
radiant golem has a Strength of 25. The creature is immune to all
weapons of less than +4 enchantment.

In addition, this golem radiates a magical death aura. All be-
ings who spend at least one hour of any 24-hour period within ten
yards of the golem must roll a saving throw vs, death magic. If
they fail, they suffer a permanent loss of 1d6 hit points. No magic
short of a wish can restore these lost hit points. The saving throw
(and hit point reduction) occur at the end of the 24-hour period in
question, The golem cannot turn this power off,

Magical attacks that are based on electricity cause no damage
to the radiant golem, but they do slow it for one or two rounds.
All other magical attacks are ignored, save for those of a fire- or
heat-based nature, which restore 1 hit point to the creature for
every die of damage they would normally inflict.

Whenever the radiant golem takes damage from an attack, it
tries to flee the area. If retreat is impossible, it turns and attacks.
While engaged in melee, it repeatedly offers its foes the chance to
break off hostilities.

The radiant golem automatically regenerates 1d10 lost hit
points at the end of any round.

 

Habitat/Society: One can best understand the radiant golem if
one thinks of it as an orphan. Long ago, an unknown race created
the mysterious creature in an attempt to improve upon the exist-
ing iron golems. They used a unique ore found on a lifeless aster-
oid to fashion the thing's body and wove magical spells never be-
fore crafted to breathe life into it.

Unlike iron golems, the radiant golem has intelligence. While it
is certainly not an intellectual giant, it is fully self-aware and able
to reason and imagine. Its creators found that the creature was
not useful as a guardian or warrior, because it would never take
action to harm another creature. By the time they had learned
about the golem's gentle and friendly nature, however, they had
fallen victim to another unexpected power—the death aura.

Since that time, the radiant golem has drifted from crystal
sphere to crystal sphere in an attempt to find friends. It longs to
have companions who do not flee from it or succumb to its deadly
presence, As such, it often latches onto parties of adventurers and
tries to join their ranks. The golem is helpful to such companions,
offering advice, lifting heavy weights, and doing everything a ser-
vant might do to make their lives easier (but shorter).

The golem does not know about its death aura, and it will not
understand or believe in the aura if told of its existence. Aware
that it is almost immortal, the golem simply assumes that living
things die very quickly. In fact, the golem often bemoans the fact
the fate has made mortals so fragile. All it wants, as it will tell ad-
venturers, is a friend.

Ecology: The radiant golem's death aura affects not only animal
life, but plant life as well. In cases where the golem has set up a
home for itself and spent a good deal of time in one area, the en-
tire region is likely to become barren and lifeless. The aura does
not affect unliving material, like stone and metal, or once living
matter (like a wooden cart) in any way.
Gravislayer

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Wildspace, asteroid fields
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Constant
DIET: Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Semi-(2-4)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 0
MOVEMENT: 24

HIT DICE: 8+]
THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 0
DAMAGE/ATTACK: Nil

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Gravity slam
SPECIAL DEFENSES: None
MAGIC RESISTANCE: None

SIZE: M (6' diam.)
MORALE: Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 3,000

The gravislayer is a navigational hazard hated by spelljammers
throughout the Known Sphere. Its unremarkable body hides one
of the most destructive forces known.

The gravislayer's body is a sphere of flesh roughly six feet in di-
ameter, scarred and pitted from the rigors of deep space patrol-
ling. There are no eyes, ears, or other features readily visible on
its grayish surface; there is a large mouth that opens up only dur-
ing feeding. A gravislayer feeds on the crushed flesh and bone of
unsuspecting spacefarers that are smashed to bits by the creature's
deadly command of gravity.

Combat: The gravislayer's weapon is its ability to change gravity.
It can turn any single object within 150 yards into a powerful
gravity source. That object may be a living being, an asteroid, or
even a character. The object remains a gravity source for as long
as the gravislayer concentrates.

The gravislayer's weapon relies on two things: the availability
of objects to fall onto new gravity sources and how far those ob-
jects fall before impact:

vailability of Objects: Anything that falls for a period of time
picks up great momentum and causes vast damage upon impact.
A gravislayer usually turns its victims into gravity sources, hop-
ing that asteroids will fall upon them to destroy them.

For purposes of gravislayer combat, asteroids are divided into
three categories. Pebbles are stones weighing less than one
pound. Boulders weigh in the neighborhood of 100-1,000
pounds, Finally, planetoids weigh more than 10,000 pounds.
Note: Every object, be it an asteroid, piece of a spaceship, or a
chest of gold, should be placed into one of these categories.

The numbers and sizes of asteroids available to a gravislayer
depend upon its immediate surroundings.

Asteroid Availability—Numbers and Sizes

Surroundings
Deep Asteroid
Space Orbit Rings Field
Pebble Ld4-2 1d4-1 2d6 2d6
Boulder id4-3 0 1d6 2d6
Planetoid 0 0 0 1d4-2

Falling Time: Each asteroid, regardless of size, takes 1d6
rounds to fall onto the target (roll for each asteroid). The damage

 

caused depends on the asteroid size and on the number of rounds
it fell. A successful saving throw vs. breath weapon negates all
damage inflicted by pebbles and boulders and half damage from
planetoids.

Hit Points of Damage, By Rounds Fallen
Rounds Fallen

1 Z 3 4 5 6
Pellet 1d4 3d4 6d4 10d4 15d4 21d4
Boulder 1d6 3d6 6d6 10d6 15d6 21d6
Planetoid 1d12 3d12 6d12 10d12 15d12 21d12
Hull Damage, By Rounds Fallen

Rounds Fallen

I Z 2 4 5 6
Pellet 1d4 2d4 3d4 4d4 5d4 6d4
Boulder 1d6é 2d6 3d6 4d6 5d6 6dé6
Planetoid 1d12 2d12s- 33d12 4d12 5d12 6d12

If the gravislayer is destroyed before the asteroids strike the tar-
get, those asteroids are then much easier to avoid (roll a saving
throw vs. breath weapon against each, with a bonus of 5, plus 2
for every round until impact). Common tactics for ship crews is
to immediately locate gravislayers and destroy them as quickly as
possible, then deal with the falling asteroids.

Habitat/Society: Gravislayers have no known planet of origin or
societal inclinations. Shipboard tales speak of a cult of nebulords,
wizards of tremendous power, who were enemies of the reigar.
The nebulords created gravislayers for their own purposes, turn-
ing them loose throughout space.

Ecology: No gravislayers have ever been captured for examina-
tion, so their means of reproduction is uncertain. They may have
none. A gravislayer is immune to the gravity that it creates. It is
not, however, immune to naturally occurring gravity.
Grommam

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate and tropical /Forests

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Clan

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Omnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)

TREASURE: 50% chance each of J, K, M (D in
community)

ALIGNMENT: Lawful good

NO. APPEARING: 10-120

ARMOR CLASS: 5 (10)

MOVEMENT: 9, 15 in trees

HIT DICE: 2+1 (males), 1+1 (females), or by
class/level

THACO: By Hit Dice or class/level

NO. OF ATTACKS: lor 2

DAMAGE/ATTACK: By weapon or spell type

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spells, missiles, and magical devices
possible

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Spells, missiles, and magical devices
possible

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (5' tall; see below)

MORALE: Elite (13-14)

XP VALUE: Varies

Grommamis are gorilla-like apes with heavy upper-body muscu-
lature. Their legs are short and their feet are roughly soled and
their toes have a limited ability to grasp objects. Grommams have
short, rough, copper-red fur all over their bodies except on their
faces, the palms of their hands, and the soles of their feet. Their
skin is a rich chocolate brown. Most grommams are five feet tall
and have arm spans up to nine feet wide. Males weigh 350-500
Ibs., while females weigh half as much.

Grommams use a gestural and finger-sign language. Body pos-
tures, facial expressions, and a variety of vocal hoots, screams,
grunts, and calls add to the basic language, called “grommish” by
other races.

Grommams prefer to wear loose, brightly colored clothing,
particularly short-sleeved kimonos. They are fond of belts, arm
straps, and leg straps, to which they attach weapons and tools
that are tied down.

Combat: Grommams prefer to use weapons when attacking,
though some enjoy wrestling and similar martial arts. Almost any
melee weapon that a human can use can also be used by a grom-
mam without change. Chain mail is used almost exclusively for
its light weight and flexibility. Shields can be used, but most
grommams take advantage of their ambidexterity and use a
weapon in either hand.

Habitat/Society: Grommams are a close-knit people. Grommams
make their homes in forests, but they enjoy the same sorts of cli-
mates as humans. They climb extremely well and some build
treehouses, but most grommams are ground dwellers. A grom-
mam family usually consists of one adult male, 1-2 adult females,
and 1d4 children. One female generally cooks, cleans, and man-
ages the children, while the other directs all household affairs
such as finances, purchases, and dealings with other grommam
families. The male performs heavy labor either for the family or
for a local guild or business. Several dozen related families forma
clan, the basic social unit, and 2d4 clans form a house, which is
led by a demigod (see below). In most clans, only the “director”

 

 

 

 

 

female is allowed to vote on political issues. Unmarried males
form the backbone of the military forces, and more than a few be-
come adventurers.

Like other races, grommams have gods—but their gods (of
demigod level) openly live among the grommams themselves as
their rulers and advisors. (Typical statistics for a demigod: AC 2;
MV 12 (15 in trees); F1S/T15/C12; hp 100; THACO 5; #AT 1 or 2;
Dmg by spell or weapon type; abilities near maximum levels; ML
18; AL LG.) These statistics vary widely by sex and among indi-
viduals. Grommams are highly religious and organized, and most
are lawful good.

Though most adult goommams have a standard 2 +1 Hit Dice,
one in eight is able to adopt a character class. A fairly young race,
grommams have limited options. Males may become fighters or
thieves (up to 20th level), and both sexes may become clerics (up
to 10th level); they cannot be multiclassed. All grommams can
climb walls at 85%, +1% per class level to 99%. Being very anti-
magical, grommams have a 40% chance for magical-item mal-
function, as per dwarves (2nd Edition Player's Handbook, page
21). Their characteristics are generated as for humans, though
with modifications: Males have Strengths of 2d4+10 (18/00
maximum) and suffer a —2 penalty to all rolls for Intelligence and
Wisdom; females have Strengths of 2d6+4 and gain a +2 bonus
to all rolls for Intelligence and Wisdom (18 maximum). All grom-
mams have their Charisma scores lowered by two when dealing
with any races but their own and other ape-like species.

Grommam spelljammer ships (usually purchased from hu-
mans) are altered to appear powerful and dramatic, with bright
colors and wild designs, but they work just like any other ships.
Because grommamis are so adept at climbing, they make heavy
use of ropes, riggings, and swing bars.

Ecology: Grommams are omnivorous, eating almost any sort of
fruits, vegetables, nuts, roots, and small game animals. They
have no trouble eating the food of any human or demihuman
race. Grommams have little effect on the affairs of other races.
Hadozee

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any space
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Company
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: G
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 3-18
ARMOR CLASS: 6
MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 3

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-8 (weapon)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (7" tall)
MORALE: Elite (13)
XP VALUE: 120

Called “deck apes," hadozee are indeed ape-like. Though taller
and more slender than the typical ape, hadozee have brown hair
covering their bodies, with a shaggy mane surrounding all of the
head except for the face. The mouth is a protruding muzzle with
several long fangs.

The most unusual feature of a hadozee is the membrane of skin
that normally hangs loosely from the creature's arms and legs.
When a hadozee raises its hands over its head, this membrane is
stretched taut and the creature has a limited gliding ability, as ex-
plained below.

Hadozee are very nimble. They can climb trees, ropes, poles,
and sheer surfaces as 10th-level thieves. Their feet are fully as
dexterous as their hands, even to the extent of having opposable
thumbs. Hadozee are tailless.

Hadozee are often hired as mercenary crews by spacetaring
races, though they have no space travel capabilities of their own.
Also, the race has a well-known capability for hard work, so they
are most commonly encountered as hired crewmen on the vessels
of others. They are especially popular with elves, both as crew-
men and hired warriors.

Combat: Hadozee are born warriors, thoroughly at home in me-
lee combat. They can use all weapons that humans can. Indeed,
hadozee can wield a weapon in each hand—or in a hand and a
foot—without penalty for two-handed combat. Their preferred
weapons include long swords, spears, and halberds.

A hadozee can glide through the air by spreading the mem-
branes on its wings, traveling one foot forward for every foot of
height it loses.

In addition, hadozee have learned to exploit the gravity plane
in their attacks against space vessels. Hadozee dive toward the
enemy deck or hull, seeking a place to land and wield their weap-
ons. If no place presents itself, they dive past the vessel and

 

   

~ S) hs = I

 

al * a
(LOANS

 

through the gravity plane, They then soar up a distance equal to
three-quarters that from which they originally descended, and
can maneuver around to dive back at the vessel from the other
side of the gravity plane.

Habitat/Society: Hadozee of both sexes are eager to be accepted
into the companies of sailors and mercenaries that sail among the
stars. A group of young adults trains together, forming a com-
pany of up to 20 or 30 individuals. They then seek work for the
master of a spacefaring vessel. The highest honor for a hadozee is
to hire on as crew or warrior for elves.

Only when they grow too old for the life of activity and adven-
ture do hadozee return to a world, where they mate and raise the
next generation,

The hadozee relationship with elves goes back to the time of the
Unhuman Wars, when the deck apes first showed a level of con-
science and culture greater than the orcs and their kin, with which
they had previously been grouped. The hadozee aided the elves in
that war, and they have been allied ever since. The elves have
willingly employed the talents of the hadozee, and have in return
paid them well. The elves in no way consider the hadozee to be an
equal race, however.

Ecology: Hadozee have the same sustenance and protection needs
as humans. Their diets are a little more adaptable—they will eat
grubs and insects, for example—and they like their climate warm
to tropical. But they can dress for cold weather and eat human
food without complaining.

 
Hamster, Giant Space

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate/Grassy plains and hills
FREQUENCY: Common to very rare
ORGANIZATION: Small pack
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Animal (1)
TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: See below

ARMOR CLASS: 8

MOVEMENT: 9, Br 3 (hard earth)
HIT DICE: 4

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-8

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Immune to disease

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: L (up to 9 long)

MORALE: Unsteady (6) (if wild: Average (9))
XP VALUE: 175

Giant space hamsters are exactly what they sound like—cute but
brown-bear-sized rodents with thick fur. They are found on
worlds having colonies of Krynnish gnomes (gnomoi and minoi).
Giant space hamsters come in a variety of colors, but are usually
golden brown with white underbellies, bands, and spots. They
are well muscled but appear fat. A giant space hamster can store
up to 200 Ibs. of food in its cheeks.

Combat: Giant space hamsters normally have only one mode of
attack—a nasty bite. They avoid even this on most occasions, as
domestic breeds are quite cowardly. However, wild breeds are
more aggressive, and they briefly charge at anyone who ap-
proaches a burrow. Domesticated females protecting their litters
also have improved morale (9). Careless gnome handlers have
sometimes been bitten and (on a successful attack roll of 19 or bet-
ter) stuffed into a cheek pouch, from which the gnome may es-
cape if he rolls a successful Strength roll to open doors on a
subsequent round. Trapped gnomes are merely covered in ham-
ster spit, and are eventually spat out like old chewing gum when
the hamster sees food.

Habitat/Society: Giant space hamsters are normally kept on huge
hamster ranches run by gnome colonists on various worlds.
These giant hamsters travel in small packs, browsing on the local
landscape and living in special hamster hutches constructed by
their gnomish keepers. The hamster hutches often include huge
artificial burrows, and some gnomes have constructed enormous
and colorful pipe systems (some of them transparent) through
which these creatures may crawl aboveground.

Wild packs of these creatures exist on worlds long settled by
gnomes, though they make easy prey for many carnivores and
are thus quite rare in the wilderness. Wild giant space hamsters
are the same size as domestic ones, but they dig their own bur-
rows (about six feet wide and 120 to 180 feet long) in hillsides.

Like their tiny ancestors, giant space hamsters enjoy all sorts of
green vegetables, fruits, nuts, grains, and water. They sometimes
eat raw or cooked meats; wild giant space hamsters especially en-
joy large insects. One giant space hamster can easily put away 30
Ibs. of food and ten gallons of water per day. These creatures are
very clean; their gnome handlers often dump wood shavings in
their lairs.

 

 

 

 

 

A small pack of giant space hamsters consists of 1d4 adults (se-
lect the sexes by starting with a female and alternating thereafter,
so a pack of three hamsters consist of two females and a male),
with a 20% chance per adult female of 1d4 young being present
(AC 10, MV 3, HD 1, #AT nil, Size S 3' long) and another 20%
chance per adult female of 1d4 juveniles being present (AC 9, MV
6, HD 2, THACO 19, #AT 1, Dmg 1d4, Size M 6' long), Gnomes
are unable to figure out how to reduce their breeding rates, aside
from separating the sexes (this conclusion was suggested after a
22-year-long research program that included five gnome fatali-
ties). Giant space hamsters can easily have several litters in one
year, and they grow to breeding adulthood in but two years.
These creatures live 18 years at most, and remain fertile all their
adult lives.

Ecology: Giant space hamsters easily fill the niche occupied by
large browsing animals, such as the elephant and the rhino on
Earth, though most of them lack any real means of defending
themselves. In the wild, they often die out despite their extraordi-
nary reproductive rate. They are preyed upon by large-and
medium-size carnivores, but they are immune to all parasites and
diseases, magical or not. Cold weather forces them to hibernate
for up to six months until the weather improves.

These creatures did not evolve naturally, as one might guess.
They were created by a gnome research committee attempting to
develop a relatively passive creature large enough to wind up the
giant rubber bands attached to the huge running wheels inside
gnomish spelljammer craft. These devices produce internal
power from torque. (Teams of gnomes formerly filled this job.)
The giant space hamsters produced by the committee ran for
hours inside their big wheels, and were eventually spread through
space,

Gnomes have found that the meat of giant space hamsters is
quite tasty. Space hamster meat is called “spaham,” and many
gnomes eat large quantities of spaham with every meal. Many
hamster ranches simply breed giant space hamsters as livestock.
Hamster, Giant Space

 

Gnomish colonies without such ranches sometimes send forth
whole expeditions of fearless Hamster Hunters, gnomes who
drive through the cosmos on their sidewheelers, singing the
praises of spaham as they go questing for their prey.

Variations

Possibly the worst aspect of the giant space hamster (aside from
its ludicrous existence) is that enchanted substances from numer-
ous other sorts of nonhuman monsters can be introduced into its
reproductive processes, producing unbelievable (except to a
gnome) new sorts of giant space hamsters. Some gnomish com-
munities deliberately breed unique subspecies in competition
with other communities to produce the most interesting varieties.
Usually, the results are more or less like the normal sort of giant
space hamster, such as the wooly, mottled, ochre, Oriental, Occi-
dental, chartreuse, spotted, not-quite-so-spotted, only-a-little-
spotted, plaid, cave-dwelling, three-toed, lesser, greater, greater
lesser, lesser greater, albino, and flightless giant space hamsters.
And then there are the really unusual varieties: such as the fol-
lowing:

* Subterranean Giant Space Hamster: This creature can dig
through any material up to soft rock at MV 6; it attacks with its
claws for 4d4/4d4.

* Sabre-toothed Giant Space Hamster: A nasty overbite lets
this hamster attack for 2d8 points of damage with fangs (but it is
still omnivorous).

* Rather Wild Giant Space Hamster: When confronted by non-
hamsters, this one gains a morale of 19 and a +2 bonus to attack
and damage rolls.

* Invisible Giant Space Hamster: This one can turn invisible at
will once per day for 1d4 +4 turns, remaining invisible even if it
attacks.

* Sylvan or Jungle Giant Space Hamster: This hamster can
climb at MV 9 up any nonslick surface with a 99% chance of suc-
cess.
* Miniature Giant Space Hamster: Being the same size as nor-
mal hamster (AC 10, MV 1, hp 1, etc.), this creature is often kept
as a pet.

* Armor Plated Giant Space Hamster: Furless and covered by a
rhino-like hide (AC 3), this very aggressive (morale 16) critter is a
hazard.

* Yellow Musk Giant Space Hamster: This yellow-furred ham-
ster has a terrible odor. It emits a 30-foot-radius cloud of poison-
ous gas causing nausea (MV 3), blindness (-4 penalty to attack
rolls), and weakness (reduce Strength by four levels) in anyone
failing a saving throw vs. poison.

* Ethereal Giant Space Hamster: Not really ethereal, this one is
translucent and its skeleton can be seen. The first sight of this
beast produces fright, as per a scare spell.

* Carnivorous Flying Giant Space Hamster: A “regrettable if
understandable line of inquiry” led to this bat-winged version
(MV 9, Fl 24 (B); bites for 3d4 points of damage, two claws for
2d4 points of damage; Morale 15).

* Two-Headed Lernaean Bombardier Giant Space Hamster:
“Well, we're certainly not likely to make this mistake again or at
least not more than once again anyway.’ Each head can make a
normal biting attack, it regenerates wounds at 3 hit points per
round (but cannot regenerate lost body parts), and once per day it
can belch so loudly that anyone within 30 feet must roll a success-
ful saving throw vs. breath weapon or be stunned (unable to at-
tack, defend, or move) for 1d4 +1 rounds.

* Fire-Breathing Phase Doppleganger Giant Space Hamster:
“We completely fail to see why everyone is so upset, especially
since biology is such an inexact science and for every step we take
forward there must be two steps backward but anyway we said
we were sorry and we d like our funding back so we can pay our

bail and go home.” This monster breathes a 30-foot-long cone of
fire that is ten feet wide at its far end, three times per day for 3d8
points of damage (successful saving throw vs. dragon breath for
half damage). The FBPDGSH suffers only half damage from fiery
attacks. This species can also phase in and out of the Prime Mate-
rial plane within a single round, just like a phase spider; it can do
this up to six times per day with a — 3 modifier to initiative. If this
creature gains initiative by more than 4 points, it can breathe fire
or bite, then phase out before being attacked. It can be attacked
every round on the Ethereal plane with only a —1 modifier to its
initiative. It can also change its shape in one round to appear to be
any other sort of bear-sized mammal. Worst of all, it is intelligent
(5-7) and has a morale of 14, and it quickly learns how best to use
its talents.

* Great Horned Giant Space Hamster: This one has a rhino-like
horn on its nose, with which it inflicts 1d12 points of damage if
charging, more than 30 feet.

*" Abominable Giant Space Hamster: An albino version
adapted to arctic weather, this one feeds on conifers. It suffers
only half damage from cold-based magic and no damage from
nonmagical cold.

* Tyrannohamsterus Rex: This immense space hamster has ab-
solutely no attacks whatsoever, unless it runs in fright and steps
on someone (AC 2; MV 9; HD 16; THACO 5; #AT 2; Dmg 10d 10;
MR 90%; Size 25’ high at shoulder, weighs 75 tons; Morale 3).
Any display of magic, fire, bright light, loud noise, etc., frightens
this beast, which then crashes through all terrain features for 1d4
miles in its panic to escape, The now-defunct gnome colony that
first bred this species did so “because it was there.”

“ Giant Space Hamster of Ill Omen: This possibly legendary
creature is an individual rumored to be of unusual size, even
larger than a Tyrannohamsterus Rex. “Wooly Rupert” (as he is
known among gnomes) is also said to be highly intelligent and to
possess spellcasting and spelljamming powers. Tales say he is not
well disposed toward gnomes of any sort, preferring to squash
them with his titanic paws. Gnomes everywhere fear the wrath of
Wooly Rupert, though they laugh nervously and claim other-
wise.

Experience-point values for these and similar sorts of giant

space hamsters should be awarded by the DM as he feels fit.

 

 
Jammer Leech

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any

 

 

 

 

 

 

FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary or cluster
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Parasite
INTELLIGENCE: Semi-(2-4)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1-4

ARMOR CLASS: 3
MOVEMENT: 1

HIT DICE: 3

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: See below
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spells
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 25%

SIZE: S (1' high)
MORALE: Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 650

Resembling the barnacle-like immature krajens, jammer leeches
are unwittingly attracted by the spellcasters who power ships
through wildspace and the phlogiston, They can be very danger-
ous if mishandled, and they always cause the ships they infest a
great deal of trouble.

A jammer leech has a hard shell, which grows to be a foot tall.
The shell can be of almost any color, though it closely matches
that of the hull of the ship it is attached to. (This makes spotting
the leech very difficult from casual observation alone.) Inside, the
leech is reddish-purple in color, with a body much like that of a
snail, It has a single, watery eye at one end. It also possesses a
sharply spiked tentacle, which is the same color and consistency
as its body,

Combat: In most situations, the jammer leech uses its tentacle for
protection. The sharp spikes on the end of the foot-long arm
cause 1d4 points of damage. That is often enough to discourage
most creatures from harassing the parasite.

In a situation where a hard swipe from a tentacle doesn't dis-
courage a predator, the jammer leech uses magic. As it rests upon
the hull, close to the spelljammer helm, the leech draws magical
energy from the wizard or priest powering the ship, For every ten
days of jamming, the leech absorbs one spell—of any level—at
random from the spellcaster’s mind. On a trip that takes 30 days,
for example, the leech would be able to absorb three spells. Luck-
ily, jammer leeches can hold only four spells at a time. However,
when more than one leech attaches itself to a ship, they each draw
spells from the spelljammer, Spellcasters who are preyed upon by
jammer leeches forget the spell absorbed by the parasite and must
regain it in the normal manner. However, the wizard or priest no-
tices the missing spell only if he attempts to recall it; otherwise,
the loss goes undetected.

In combat, the jammer leech discharges the spells it has stolen
at random. The parasite uses all the magic it has stored, one spell
per round, to drive away its assailant. The spell is cast at the level
at which the victimized spellcaster would cast it. If more than one
mage or priest powered the helm during the ten days, the average
level is used.

There are only two effective ways to deal with a magic-laden
jammer leech: kill it with a single strike or cast a separate dispel
magic spell on each parasite to disarm it before striking. How-

 

 

 

 

ever, the leech has 25% resistance to magic, so attacking the crea-
ture is always a risky business. Once its magic reserve is gone and
the parasite's hard shell is cracked, it is an easy target.

It is important to note that leeches will use their spells to ward
off any physical attack. They frequently discharge their spells
during any battle in which their section of the hull is repeatedly
struck. Sometimes this works in favor of the leech’s host ship, but
more often it proves to be disastrous.

Habitat/Society: Since a jammer leech does not need air to sur-
vive, it can be found almost anywhere there are spelljammers. Be-
ginning as a spore, the jammer leech attaches itself to the hull of a
ship, at a spot close to the spelljamming helm. The spore digs into
the hull, then draws food and nutrients from the ship's surface at a
rate of 1 hull point a month. After only one week on the ship, the
spore develops a hard shell that roughly matches the color of the
hull itself. The shell is attached to the ship by a strong, glue-like
substance secreted by the leech, making the task of scraping it
from the hill time consuming and tedious.

These parasites are found in small groups of four or less. If
more than two leeches are encountered, there is a 10% chance
they are a mated pair that produces 1d6 spores once per month.
Some of these may quickly join their parents on the hull of the
ship, while others float off, waiting to attach themselves to an-
other unwary vessel.

Ecology: Jammer leeches have few intelligent natural predators,
for most creatures quickly learn that attacking these parasites is
painful, if not deadly. Some omnivores, such as zards, try to eat
leeches as they would anything else, but the parasites can usually
warn these creatures off with a sharp swipe of their tentacle.
The glue that the leeches secrete to hold their shells to a hull is ex-
tremely strong and highly prized. The gooey purple substance is wa-
terproof, fireproof, and even slightly magic resistant (5%). The
dangers involved in collecting live leeches and maintaining them lim-
its this market, however, and the glue is rare and very expensive.
Lakshu

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Division
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Mainly day
DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 2-20

ARMOR CLASS: 0 (7)
MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 5

THACO: (See below)
NO. OF ATTACKS: One by weapon and by shakti
DAMAGE/ATTACK: By weapon and by shakti
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Shakti
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Shakti

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 20%

SIZE: M (5'6"-6' tall)
MORALE: Fanatic (17-18)
XP VALUE: 2,000

Lakshu are tall, beautiful, well-muscled, green-haired amazons.
These teeth-gritting, armored harridans have laid waste to a
thousand worlds, all in the name of their masters, the reigar. Lak-
shu have a fondness for tattoos, body paint, and ornate raiment
(when not in battle dress). Their physical appearance is virtually
identical; the only identifying marks are their tattoos, and their
individual tastes in off-duty clothing. The principle form of iden-
tification comes from their individual shaktis (see entry on Reigar
for complete shakti information), Consequently, each lakshu is
known by her totem animal (e.g., Phoenix, Manta, etc.).

Combat: Lakshu are deadly in combat, exhibiting extreme profi-
ciency in their weapon of choice, They are equally skilled in
armed and unarmed combat, having been adapted by the reigar
expressly as bodyguards/shock troops and shakti repair experts.
Lakshu enter a berserker rage (morale 20, lasting until no oppo-
nents remain standing, +2 to attack and damage rolls) when re-
duced to half their hit point total.

In battle, each lakshu can call and command up to three helots
(golem-like creatures that have the same attacks as their organic
counterparts: AC 2, MV by creature type, HD by creature type
+2, unaffected by sleep and charm spells; helots do not have any
special abilities or spell-like abilities their organic forms may pos-
sess). These helots are used by the reigar in coordination with the
lakshu as organized fighting units, in addition to serving as crew
members on the reigar esthetics.

Habitat/Society: It is not known how the association of the reigar
and the lakshu came to be, but for as long as either race can remem-
ber they have been partners of sorts. The most accepted theory is
that a raiding party of lakshu landed on the reigar homeworld with
intent to dominate, little knowing what awaited them. (They had
heard about these namby-pamby artistes, but nothing was said to
them about the lengths to which these artistes would go in their
search for the ultimate experience.) As soon as the lakshu saw the
shakti devices, they realized that an alliance was the best possible
move for them. By accident it was discovered that the lakshu also

 

 

 

 

had an affinity for shakti repair, which suited the reigar. (Repairs
are not part of the reigar style—they are repetitious and mundane,
two concepts that are foreign to the reigar.)

The reigar liked the lakshu's war-like temperament, and they
were likewise pleased at the lakshu’'s ease with the shaktis. So the
reigar set about appropriating the lakshu as a work of art. This
entailed creating a uniform appearance for their race, in keeping
with the reigar ideal of a single work of art. In this case, that
meant re-creating the appearance of the lakshu as a whole, to gain
the currently uniform height, weight, body mass, etc.

Lakshu are now the elite troops of the reigar, and they serve as
crew members on esthetics, in which capacity they are in charge
of the daily operations of the crafts. In return for their services,
lakshu receive room, board, travel, and (for those who are espe-
cially favored or who perform above and beyond the call) some-
times even gifts, uniquely created for them by their commanding
reigar. And, of course, they are given personal shaktis that func-
tion in the same way as the reigar’s.

Their society, such as it is, is military in structure. Whenever
two or more lakshu are present in one place, one must be superior
to the others. A strict hierarchy is maintained, so that each lakshu
knows her place and does not aspire to elevate herself.

Lakshu reproduce via parthenogenesis. At specific times they
give birth to a young lakshu, who is raised in a creche with the
other offspring.

Ecology: Since their alliance with the reigar, the lakshu have be-
come dependent on the esthetics for all their food needs, Their
war-like raiding has been controlled as well; no longer are they
laying waste at will. Now they lay waste when told to by their
masters,

 
Lumineaux

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Phlogiston
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Special
INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (15-16)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Unknown
NO, APPEARING: 1-2
ARMOR CLASS: 2
MOVEMENT: 18

HIT DICE: 20
THACO: _

NO. OF ATTACKS: oa
DAMAGE/ATTACK: See below
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 50%

SIZE: G
MORALE: Fanatic (17)
XP VALUE: 9,000

The lumineaux are vast, diaphanous creatures that inhabit the
flow. Some sages liken them to the giant mantas of earthly seas.
To others, they are like white cells gliding through the lifeblood of
the cosmos, filtering potential impurities.

Lumineaux seek out portals to the crystal spheres, and then
wrap themselves over the shell like a patch on a ball. They are vir-
tually invisible to spacefarers. Phlogiston within their cells cre-
ates a rainbow-colored camouflage for their semitransparent
body.

Combat: Lumineaux feed on memories. They actively channel
life forms through a convoluted series of permeable membranes,
slowly draining away levels of experience. The drain is only tem-
porary, but among the uninitiated, it can prompt hasty and fool-
ish responses.

To extract memories, a lumineaux appears to create a kind of
telepathic link with any intelligent life form passing through its
body. When fixed on an intriguing memory, the lumineaux dead-
ens that portion of the mind and “copies” the information. As a
result, the victim loses 1 experience level per turn of drain. The
victim may sense some confusion, but it must roll a successful
Wisdom check to realize that memories and experience are wan-
ing. Of course, spellcasters whose levels are dropping may notice
more immediate results when they find their available spells re-
duced in accordance with their loss in level. Other penalties to
abilities that are based on experience level also apply. The lumi-
neaux usually does not intend to kill its captives, and it drains
them to a minimum of 1 level.

Lumineaux can absorb travelers who are entering or leaving a
crystal sphere. Normal passage through the creature lasts 2d4 +2
turns. The speed or size of the ship is not a factor. The ship is re-
duced to combat speed and can perform combat maneuvers, but
such maneuvers have little effect on the duration of the trip
through the creature's strange digestive tract. Only one maneuver
alters the trip: in full reverse, a ship with an SR above 6 can effec-
tively stall itself. As the ship nears the lumineaux's outer mem-
brane, the creature forcefully expels it.

Just as humans are mostly water, lumineaux consist mainly of
the phlogiston’s mysterious, flammable ether. As a result, any in-
cendiary attack, magical or otherwise, has the same fiery effect as
such assaults have in the phlogiston itself.

 

 

 

Attempts to form a spiritual link with the creature are also dan-
gerous. Any attempt to read the creature's mind or detect its
alignment calls for a saving throw vs. paralyzation (at the charac-
ter's current level). A failed saving throw means the character is
overwhelmed by the barrage of thoughts, and he suffers 2d10
points of damage.

Other spells and attacks work normally against the lumineaux.
The best defense, however, may be no defense. The drain in expe-
rience level is only temporary; levels return at the rate of 1 per
day as soon as the ship leaves the lumineaux.

More dangerous than the lumineaux itself are the scavengers
that may lie in waiting in the phlogiston, hoping for easy, low-
level prey. A crew with scavvers traveling in its air pocket has
similar cause for worry. Scavvers are not intelligent enough to be
weakened by the lumineaux’s attention. Larger scavvers, which
are aggressive, may attack the ship when its crew is most vulnera-
ble.

If viciously attacked, a lumineaux tries to consume its attacker
repeatedly, draining experience levels until its attacker no longer
poses a threat. If that means killing its opponent, so be it.

Habitat/Society: Not much is known about the lumineaux. They
are even rarer than the portals they guard, Sages who believe that
greater divine forces govern the known gods offer the most plau-
sible concept. They propose that the ultimate celestial powers
may use the lumineaux as sentries, whose purpose is to monitor
the activities within a crystal sphere.

Nearly every encounter with a lumineaux to date has involved
a solitary creature. Occasionally, however, two have been known
to guard a portal. Sages suggest that such junctions indicate a def-
inite mating cycle.

Ecology: Because their cells are filled with phlogiston, lumineaux
are found only in the flow.
Lutum (Mud-Woman)

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any

 

 

 

 

 

 

FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary or clan
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Special

INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (15-16)
TREASURE: P. Q (individuals); D (in lair)
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil

NO. APPEARING: 1 or 1-8

ARMOR CLASS: 7 (base)

MOVEMENT: 12, 18 (rolling)

HIT DICE: 6

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: lor3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: By weapon or 1-6/1-6/1-8
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Smothering, spells
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (5' tall) to L (7” tall)
MORALE: Elite (14)

XP VALUE: 2,000

In their true forms, the malicious lutums appear to be amorphous
beings of tan, gelatinous clay that move by rolling. They fashion
limbs for themselves as needed to aid in locomotion or combat.
Lutums are able to sculpt themselves into bipedal and quadrupe-
dal forms; with few exceptions they choose humanoid female
shapes. Most lutums prefer these forms to their own.

Furthermore, because all lutums have an innate ability to cast
alter self four times a day, with a duration of four hours for each
spell, they can so closely resemble female humans, half-elves, and
elves, including drow, that others cannot tell their true nature.
These women appear nearly perfect in form and have beautiful,
striking features. The lutums have learned that imitating attrac-
tive women—rather than plain ones or males—helps them fur-
ther their goals. Because of their other spell-like abilities, many
pose as wizards or druids.

Some lutums prefer to take on the images of existing humans
and demihumans. This enables them to be automatically ac-
cepted in certain circles, and their behavior usually causes much
embarrassment for the people they mimic.

Combat: In humanoid form, lutums posing as spellcasters usually
attack with their spell-like abilities and magical items first. If they
are forced to melee, they prefer to attack with weapons, further
adding to the ruse that they are humans or demihumans. How-
ever, if pressed or if their true forms are revealed, lutums attack
with two clay-like arms and with their large maws. If a victim is
struck with all three of these attacks, he is considered caught in
the gelatinous clay mass and will smother in 1d4 +1 rounds.

All lutums are able to cast the following spells: alter self four
times a day, ESP twice a day, and friends, stoneskin, passwaill,
stoneshape, and clairaudience once a day.

A common combat tactic of a lutum is to lure a male victim
close by using its feminine charms, cast friends to keep him off
guard, and then attack with surprise in an attempt to smother
him. If the lutum is planetside, it uses stoneshape to catch the vic-
tim, and then pummels him to death. Its passwall ability is usu-
ally held in the event it needs to escape. In addition, one out of ten
lutums can study magic and rise to the status of a 4th-level wiz-
ard.

Lutums are immune to transmute rock to mud, stone to flesh,
and both spells’ reverses. They suffer full damage from blunt

 

 

 

 

 

weapons, but only half damage from edged weapons. An earth-
quake spell instantly kills lutums, and a move earth spell incapac-
itates them for 1d6 turns.

Habitat/Society: Lutums prefer to act on their own. Their greed is
so overpowering that they would rather not share anything with
others of their kind. However, some lutums have learned that
when they combine forces they can gain more power and wealth.
In such lutum clans there is always a leader, usually the largest lu-
tum.

Lutums desire to gather the most magic and wealth possible,
and to do so by assimilating themselves into human and demihu-
man societies. Lutums especially love magic that enables them to
retain their human and demihuman forms longer.

Lutums are also power-hungry. Some have been known to rise
to important positions in human and demihuman governments
by marrying the leaders, killing them, and then inheriting con-
trol, or simply by marrying the leaders and pulling their strings.
In democratic societies, lutums prefer to rise to power on their
own merits, campaigning for office and frequently winning be-
cause of their beauty, poise, and ruthlessness.

Lutums enjoy traveling from planet to planet, acquiring power
and wealth. They usually find passage on ships by appearing as
beautiful women in dire need of transportation, A few lutums
who have used their charms on the crew have been taught how to
operate the ships, and they have subsequently taken them over.

Ecology: The origin of lutums is a mystery. Some believe a mad
wizard experimenting with earth elementals gave them life. Oth-
ers think that they are a variety of mimic from the plane of Ooze.
Lutums must eat rocks, minerals, and a variety of clay com-
pounds to gain nourishment.

Lutums are asexual. They reproduce by splitting in half, but
only when they feel a need to increase the power of their race; this
usually occurs when one or more lutums in a clan die. The new lu-
tums are born as adults with full abilities.
Mimic, Space

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Wildspace
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: High (13-14)
TREASURE: V (U)
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 2
MOVEMENT: 3, Fl 18 (B)
HIT DICE: 12

THACO: 9

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 3-12 (smash)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Glue

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Camouflage
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

 

SIZE: L (varies)
MORALE: Champion (15)
XP VALUE: 5,000

Mimics are the result of a magical experiment. Despite their very
thick, resilient hide, these creatures have the ability to change
their shapes and colors at will in order to fool nearby victims,
which they then feed on, Space mimics sometimes pass as ship de-
bris floating in wildspace, as an ornate chest, or as an elaborate
wizard’s desk with books and scrolls in an abandoned ship.

Space mimics have two eyes, which normally remain hidden
under thick eyelids. In addition, space mimics can sense heat and
light within 90 feet.

Space mimics are about the same size as their planetside coun-
terparts, about 150 cubic feet (a 3’ x 6’ x 8’ chest for example or a
small lifeboat). The natural skin of the space mimic is pitch black,
with small specks of twinkling light, imitating a space back-
ground. The space mimic can change its shape and color in one
round to resemble a piece of furniture made of any variety of
wood, stone, or metal (either plain or carved). Like the common
mimic, the space mimic must retain its normal size, but can other-
wise radically alter its shape.

The space mimic speaks its own tongue and often another three
or four. The languages it 1s most likely to understand are neogi
(01-20), the arcane tongue (21-40), human common (41-70), be-
holder (71-75), elven (76-90), or illithid (91-95). On a roll of 96+,
the space mimic is eager to learn a new language.

Combat: Mimics use their shapechanging abilities to surprise
their victims (-4 penalty to the victim's surprise roll), If attacked,
a space mimic lashes out with a pseudopod that inflicts 3d4 points
of damage. The mimic is also covered with a strong glue that can
hold anyone or anything coming in contact. A victim can be
pulled free in three rounds only if the glue is weakened with a
flask of alcohol. The space mimic can dissolve its glue anytime it
so desires, and can control which areas of its hide are covered
with the glue. Mimics are immune to acid, molds, green slime,
and various puddings.

Space mimics have the ability to cast the spells available to a
4th-level illusionist, This is an innate ability, and thus the spells
do not require components. Space mimics do need to locate spell
books or scrolls in order to acquire the spells initially. Once they
have acquired a spell, they may use it as a 4th-level illusionist.
Space mimics also need rest to recover spells previously cast. A

 

 

 

 

 

common spell mix for space mimics might include the following:
audible glamer, cantrip, spook, Nystul’s magical aura, hypnotic
pattern, improved phantasmal force, and invisibility.

Space mimics are as much interested in food as they are in
magic. When visitors approach, the space mimic stays invisible to
study the party. If it finds out there is a wizard, the space mimic
tries to lure the spellcaster somewhere alone, and then hypnotizes
him while it steals books, scrolls, or magical items. After eating a
victim, the mimic goes into hiding. If the party remains, the un-
discovered mimic may attempt to lure yet another member when
it hungers again.

Habitat/Society: Space mimics live in wildspace. They are soli-
tary creatures that enjoy spending time reading space lore, tomes
on magic, and other arcane volumes, Unlike their common cous-
ins, space mimics have various cultures, usually based on their
readings. These mimics are intelligent; they exchange books they
already read for food or other books. Space mimics have neither
religious beliefs nor any morals.

When food is scarce, the mimic turns invisible and goes dor-
mant for up to two to three years, after which time it will die un-
less it feeds. A good meal (one or two humans) sustains a space
mimic for 1d4+4 months. Space mimics can levitate at will,
which enables them to slowly travel across wildspace.

Ecology: Mimics were created by wizards to protect their trea-
sures. This strain was created for long voyages, but they soon
proved unreliable servants. After being discarded, mimics sur-
vived, reproducing by fission. Along with their glue, space mim-
ics exude an odor that attracts rodents, space vermin, and
occasional monsters as well.

Body parts of the space mimic are as useful as that of its com-
mon cousin. In addition, the space mimic often keeps some trea-
sure (usually books or scrolls) in a pocket under its belly.
Misi

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Wildspace/phlogiston
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Pack

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Magical energy
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)
TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1-6

ARMOR CLASS: 0

MOVEMENT: 12 (through any medium) (or SR 5)
HIT DICE: 5

THACO: N/A

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 (for entire pack)
DAMAGE/ATTACK: Special

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Injured only by spells
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 10%

SIZE: S (3' tall)

MORALE: Unsteady (7)

XP VALUE: 975

When a party encounters a pack of misi, always roll 1d6 to deter-
mine the number present, as the number of misi encountered may
have a serious effect on any combat that follows.

Misi do not exist in three of the four dimensions that humans
and humanoids are capable of sensing. They have no physical
manifestations in terms of length, width, or height. Instead, they
exist solely in the fourth through sixth dimensions. Consequently,
they cannot be injured by any form of physical attack, although
they can be contacted and affected by magic.

Occasionally, misi can be glimpsed in the spacial dimensions as
rainbow-colored scintillations of indistinct shape, but for no
more than a few moments at a time. Such appearances can occur
anyplace—on the surface of a planet, in the depths of wildspace,
or even out on the phlogiston ocean. However, misi are almost al-
ways seen near spelljammer ships, for they are attracted to the
magical emanations associated with the spacefaring craft.

Combat: The misi have no direct means of inflicting physical in-
jury on ordinary beings. Instead, the misi rely on an indirect
method to defend themselves—interfering with any magic being
used at the time, especially magic powering the spelljammer
ships.

When the misi attack, they always do so as a group, making a
single attack no matter how many of them are involved. Their at-
tack comes in one of two forms: They either interfere with spell-
jammer navigation, or they try to alter any spell being cast at the
time. In either case, to see if the misi’s attack is successful, roll an
Intelligence check for the character casting the spell or using the
spelljammer helm. If the user/wearer passes the check, he has re-
pelled the misi attack. Otherwise, the misi are successful. To de-
termine the results of a successful misi attack, consult the
following table in the next column:

The misi cannot be injured by any sort of physical attack, in-
cluding those made with magical weapons. They are vulnerable
only to damage from spells, and then only if an individual misi
can be located to have the spell cast at it.

Characters attempting to locate a misi have a percentage
chance equal to three times their Intelligence score of spotting a
misi’s scintillating body for one round. For example, a character

 

 

 

 

 

with an Intelligence score of 10 has a 30% chance of spying a misi,
and a character with a Intelligence of 18 has a 54% chance. Misi
cannot be detected by means of a detect invisible spell, but they
can be located by use of a locate animal, locate object, or ESP

spell.

No. of Effect on Effect on
Misi Spell or Caster Spelljammer Ship
1 Negates spell Drifts off course
2 Spell affects random PC Stops dead
3 Caster takes any Accelerates toward hazard

spell damage (planet, asteroids, star)
4 Caster loses magic Ship loses gravity
for 1 day
S Castersuffers5d10damage Ship's air becomes deadly
6 Caster dies; save to negate Ship explodes and
breaks up, crew suffers
1d12 damage apiece

Habitat/Society: Misi live in small family groups in the fourth,
fifth, and sixth dimensions. They cannot see into the first three di-
mensions any better than the PCs can see into the fourth, fifth,
and sixth. They are aware of PCs only as vague shadows. They
have absolutely no interest in characters inhabiting the first three
dimensions, save when those characters are using magic.

Ecology: Misi feed on magical emanations and are therefore at-
tracted to spelljamming ships. When misi attach themselves to a
ship, they flit about the rudder, rigging, and decks, occasionally
becoming visible as scintillating manifestations of light. They
feed for 1d10 turns. During this time, the spelljammer’s SR is re-
duced by 1 per round (that’s right, per round!) of feeding. When
the SR drops below 1, the ship drops out of spelljamming speed
and is stranded until the misi finish feeding.
Moon, Rogue

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Wildspace
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Nil

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Animal to low (1-7)
TREASURE: Nil (incidental)
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 5

MOVEMENT: 3, Fl 18 (D)

HIT DICE: 15

THACO: 5

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1, Special
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-10, Special
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Paralyzing spines

SPECIAL DEFENSES: _Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: HtoG
MORALE: Steady (11)
XP VALUE: 9,000

The rogue moon, a wandering monster the size of a whale, earned
its name from the fact that it resembles a ball glowing in the dark.
It dwells in the more remote regions of wildspace where, from a
distance, it may be mistaken for a moon.

The rogue moon has a roughly spherical body covered with
scales that are orange to bright yellow. The scales form a thick,
flexible armor. The rogue moon has two stalks and a large mouth
on one side, and small openings regularly spaced about the rest of
its body. The stalks are flexible and move constantly. The rogue
moon's teeth are well adapted for a variety of different foods.
Dozens of spikes lie flat on the scales, pointing away from the
stalks and the mouth area,

Combat: Over the centuries, the rogue moon developed the un-
canny ability to fool those who travel through wildspace. Un-
wary travelers and occasional monsters tend to move toward
unknown sources of light. When the prey comes within several
hundred yards, the rogue moon stops glowing and slowly drifts
forward in the dark.

If the rogue moon gets within 30 feet of a prey, it suddenly in-
creases its size tenfold, erecting its spikes, As it enlarges, the
rogue moon sucks smaller prey toward it, unless they make a suc-
cessful Dexterity check (success means they managed to grab
onto their ship). Victims automatically impale themselves on the
spikes when falling, suffering 1d12 points of damage. They must
roll a successful saving throw vs. poison at the beginning of the
next round or remain paralyzed for 1d6 turns.

Even a ship can be affected by the rogue moon's inhalation.
Generally, a very large object, such as a ship, will hit the rogue
moon one round after smaller objects, such as passengers. The
rogue moon can avoid the ship by moving to one side, Otherwise,
the impact causes | point of hull damage to the ship, 1d10 points
of damage to all passengers (including those who impaled them-
selves on the moon's spikes), and 5d8 points of damage to the
rogue moon itself.

If attacked, the rogue moon uses its sharp teeth to fight back,
inflicting 1d10 points of damage per successful attack. After com-
bat, the rogue moon returns to its normal size, shakes off any par-
alyzed prey, and devours them.

Habitat/Society: The rogue moon is by nature a wandering mon-

 

ster, It lives in the darker regions of wildspace, moving about er-
ratically. The rogue moon generally drifts in space, covering
several hundred miles in a month.

The rogue moons are solitary creatures. They do not mate, but
have a peculiar way of reproducing. Every five years, a rogue
moon exudes moonspawn, a thin, glowing cloud consisting of
gases and microscopic eggs. The moonspawn does not dissipate
into wildspace, as its cohesive properties enable it to stay to-
gether. The moonspawn then drifts away from the rogue moon.
The smell of moonspawn can attract another rogue moon from
thousands of miles away. When it reaches the moonspawn, the
other rogue moon is fertilized. A year later, the “mother” casts
away a dozen 1-HD rogue moons that immediately wander away
in space. If anything or anyone else comes in contact with moon-
spawn, the moonspawn is wasted.

Rogue moons can move by compressing air out of the openings
in their scales, They can retain air found in occasional pockets of
air in space or around large objects. This how rogue moons move
in combat, or leave the surface of larger objects. If a rogue moon
accidentally lands on a large ship, it would use the air on that ship
to propel itself away. They also can “walk” by slowly moving
their spikes in the manner of sea urchins. In total vacuum, they
are stranded, helpless against attackers, and would eventually
perish. Rogue moons do not need to breathe air.

Ecology: Rogue moons can live without food for months. If starv-
ing, they go into a state of lethargy that lasts up to ten years or un-
til they sense something or someone approaching. Beyond ten
years, rogue moons wither and die.

The liver of rogue moons makes an excellent component for re-
verse gravity potions. The glands producing their venom can be
used as an ingredient in various soporific drugs. (These glands are
located at the base of the spikes, under the scales.) Treasure be-
longing to previous victims may be found inside these creatures,
provided it was made of, or encased in, acid-resistant material.
Mortiss

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Space/Non-moon, non-planet
FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Colony

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Constant

DIET: Organic debris & solar energy
INTELLIGENCE: Non-(0)

TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 4

MOVEMENT: 1

HIT DICE: 1-100

THACO: 20

NO, OF ATTACKS: 1-6 per foe
DAMAGE/ATTACK: l

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Sting

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Withdraw into tubes, webs
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: Varies (2" to 6’ long)
MORALE: Fearless (20)
XP VALUE: Varies

Mortiss are called the “termites of wildspace;’ though scholars
draw a closer analogy to aquatic coral. Mortiss are a colony of
wildspace worms that bore through vegetable and mineral mat-
ter. They are a hazard to the hulls of all spelljamming ships. The
gravity planes and oppressive air envelopes of moons and worlds
prove fatal to the worm after a month of continued exposure,

Mortiss young are about two inches long, while adults may
grow to a length of six feet. Mortiss are unsegmented round-
worms with a dorsal and ventral rib. They are eyeless, sensing by
smell and vibration. They have a collar of feathery tendrils ring-
ing their head. In addition, they have a poisonous stinger on the
top of their heads and can extrude two pairs of opposing jaws to
latch onto and suck blood from prey.

Combat: Mortiss infestation may occur from a collision with egg
casings, from bringing mortiss-infested artifacts on board, or
from docking near a mortiss-infested asteroid or ship for several
hours. Mortiss cause 1d3 points of hull damage per week, and
they may also infest the upper decks and lower hold through the
hulls. Burrow tubes begin to appear within three to four weeks,
always on the side of the ship that receives the most light. As with
termites, burrows weaken the decking and superstructure, caus-
ing breakthroughs when excessive weight is applied to the under-
mined deck, Mortiss infestations may be destroyed by fire; a cure
disease spell destroys a 10’x10' nest of mortiss.

Mortiss any creatures that try to destroy their burrows. They
may sting the invading creatures with their head spines, causing 1
point of damage per sting. Victims must roll successful saving
throws vs. poison (with a —2 penalty) or suffer 1d6 additional
points of damage and a delusional side effect. Deluded individ-
uals start to see dangers as greater or lesser than they really are, or
they may experience hallucinations of being elsewhere, shutting
out reality altogether. Victims suffer the delusion for 1d6 hours.
A deluded victim may roll Intelligence checks to disbelieve an as-
pect of his delusion each round, but he suffers a +1 penalty per
poisoned sting suftered.

Mortiss also may lunge at a victim and latch onto him with
their jaws, draining 1 point per round. Up to six mortiss can at-
tack for every five-foot-square area the intruders enter. Each
mortiss has 1 Hit Die; the number of worms in the colony equals

 

 

 

 

the total number of Hit Dice. A mortiss colony increases by 1d6
Hit Dice for every point of hull damage it causes.

Habitat/Society: Mortiss generally do not get along with other
life. However, certain wildspace denizens seem to coexist with
mortiss just fine, such as scavvers, krajens, kindori, and
elmarins. Indeed, one effect of a mortiss colony is to replenish the
air envelope. Thus wildspace denizens often lair among mortiss,
waiting for prey to wander near.

Mortiss have the magical ability to convert light energy into
magic, enabling them to burrow through wood and rock as if it
were soil. The digested material is converted into a clay that is
used to construct coral castles atop their burrows. Early infesta-
tions of mortiss may go undetected, until the stone-like tubes ap-
pear on the hull. Left to their own, mortiss will encase a ship
within a year with their constructions, destroying the hull.
Scholars hypothesize that many asteroids, and perhaps even
some smaller moons, may contain some hidden structure at their
heart, thanks to the mortiss’ endeavors.

Mortiss are hermaphroditic and mutually fertilize each others
egg casings. Casings are then deposited on spelljammer hulls to
hatch within a week of laying. Mortiss egg cases resemble geodes.

Ecology: Mortiss can burrow through wood and stone at a rate of
one yard per turn, They must expose themselves to light for up to
one hour before they can burrow for an equal amount of time.
They cannot store more than one hour's worth of energy and
must return to the surface after an hour of burrowing to soak up
more light energy.

A colony covers a five-foot-square area for every Hit Die. In
addition, for every 4 Hit Dice, the colony erects one ten-foot-
square castle to a height of 1dé feet.

Spelljammers should be warned to regularly check their hull,
and periodically make landfalls of a month or more to rid their
vessels of these parasites.
Murderoid

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

‘_LIMATE/TERRAIN: Wildspace
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary a
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: High (13-14)
TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil

NO. APPEARING: l or 1-4

ARMOR CLASS: tt)

MOVEMENT: | FI 12 (E)

HIT DICE: 50

THACO: 5

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1-3 oe
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 5-50 each

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spells

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Spells

MAGIC RESISTANCE: __ Nil

SIZE: G (1-600 miles diam.)
MORALE: Champion (16)

XP VALUE: 51,000

Murderoids, so named by travelers because of their aggressive,
evil nature, are perhaps the largest denizens of space. These living
asteroids are fierce rock creatures that possess their own gravity
and atmosphere and move about systems in search of food. Their
air envelope is 1d4 miles thick. They attack all creatures smaller
than themselves.

Most murderoids are 100 miles long, or longer, and their
weight ranges from billions to trillions of tons. Murderoids have
a coarse, rock-like skin that is several feet thick and ranges in
color from dark brown to dark gray. Their sensory organs, simi-
lar to eyes and ears, appear as craters and small hills. They speak
no language, but they are able to communicate their emotions to
other murderoids by changing the color of their skin. Lighter
shades represent satisfaction and pleasure, darker shades repre-
sent hunger and anger.

Combat: Murderoids can sense creatures up to 60,000 miles
away. They attack by luring living creatures to land on their rock-
like skin, Once a creature is on its surface, the murderoid uses
spells and its physical attacks to prevent the creature from leav-
ing.

Each murderoid can cast grease, dig, hallucinatory terrain,
stone shape, and earthquake, as a 14th-level spellcaster (though
only three times a day). The range of the spell is the murderoid’s
surface and air envelope.

Murderoids usually begin their assault by casting a special hal-
lucinatory terrain spell to make their surfaces appear to be para-
dise. Once a ship or creature has landed, the murderoid casts
stone shape to form a part of itself around the ship or creature to
prevent its escape. Additional tactics include casting grease or dig
spells so creatures cannot stand, or earthquake so ships are dam-
aged. After its spell assault, the murderoid attacks physically by
opening up a “mouth” on its surface and biting its victim, A mur-
deroid can create up to three mouths in each one-square-mile
area, and 12 mouths over its entire form. A mouth can sustain 30
points of damage before being destroyed. It takes 30 minutes to
regenerate a mouth.

Murderoids are immune to earthquake spells. However, move
earth stuns a square-mile area of the creature for 1d6 rounds, and
stone to flesh stuns a square-mile area for 1d4 turns,

 

Habitat/Society: Murderoids live to eat and continuously hunt
for food. They consider all living things smaller than themselves
fair game. They have no established territory, forever wandering
space in search of food.

Murderoids are solitary creatures; only in extremely rare cir-
cumstances is a group encountered. Such groups contain juvenile
murderoids, each of which is less than 50 miles long.

From an early age, murderoids learn that status is important.
And status is usually measured by the number of ships a murde-
roid has gathered. While the bulk of a captured ship is consumed,
a murderoid usually leaves a section of the ship on its skin to dis-
play to any passing murderoids. The oldest murderoids usually
have the most trophies, Unfortunate spacefarers have discovered
that occasionally the section of aship which is being used as a tro-
phy transmits a distress beacon; this beacon lures yet more space-
tarers to their doom. Such beacons include flashing lights or
magical items that transmit light or energy.

Murderoids mate once every 50 years. A mating results in one
egg, which is laid on a small asteroid. The infant murderoid eats
the asteroid and takes its place—much to the chagrin of space
travelers who thought that body to be a lifeless rock. In infant
stage, the murderoid is a 10-Hit Die creature and can generate
only three mouths over its entire body. Infant stage lasts five
years, then the creature is considered a 50-Hit Die adult.

Murderoids live to be about 6,000 years old, generally growing
at a rate of one mile in diameter for every 100 years.

Ecology: Murderoids’ favorite food are kindori and radiant drag-
ons. Their natural enemies are spacefaring dwarves. Evil human-
oids have been known to hunt infant murderoids, which thev
attempt to charm for their own malign purposes.

The skin of a murderoid can be used as spell components for
stone shape and hallucinatory terrain spells.
Nay-Churr

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Space
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary - - -
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Animal (1)
TREASURE: See below
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: -2/4/7
MOVEMENT: Fl 3 (E); see below
HIT DICE: 15 to 25
THACO: See below

NO. OF ATTACKS: See below
DAMAGE/ATTACK: See below
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Swallowing
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Convulsion
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: H (200' + long)
MORALE: Nil

XP VALUE: 10,000

The nay-churr (the name is singular and plural) are members of a very
rare and widely dispersed species whose origin is lost in antiquity.
These creatures ply the swirling eddies of the phlogiston, although
they are occasionally found inside a crystal sphere. They can exist in
any environment.

Body types vary slightly, but all nay-churr have certain physical
properties in common. The dominant feature of the body is a rock-
hard—but still flexible—stomach in the shape of a tapered cylinder
when it is empty. At the end of the creature is a mouth-like opening
(called the maw) that is roughly the shape of an oblong rectangle
when at rest. When the creature is feeding, the maw expands to sev-
eral times its normal size; in the largest varieties, the maw can be as
much as 500 feet in diameter.

Differences in size (and Hit Dice) run roughly according to this pat-
tern:

Hit Dice Length Maw Diam. (expanded)
15-17 200' 150"
18-21 300" 200°
22-24 400" 350'
25 500° 500°

Combat: The nay-churr does not engage in combat per se; it is virtu-
ally mindless and doesn't know anything about attacking. (A normal
attack roll still applies, to see if the creature hits anything it comes
into contact with.) However, it can certainly be dangerous to trav-
elers,

The nay-churr spends its lifetime cruising through whatever envi-
ronment it occupies, taking in any object or substance it happens to
run across, as long as the object is small enough to fit in its maw. The
object is not damaged by being swallowed; characters and ships—to
name two examples of things that can be swallowed—can be carried
around inside the creature's stomach for an indefinite length of time
and then disgorged intact and unharmed. The creature's treasure con-
sists of whatever it happens to be carrying around at the time, ranging
from rocks and wreckage to undamaged and still useful items—up to
and including entire ships.

The most effective way to fight a nay-churr is to simply avoid it;
fortunately, because the creature moves very slowly and is very poor
at changing direction, this is generally pretty easy to do. If combat is
desirable or necessary (for instance, if a disabled companion is
trapped inside the nay-churr), then the best approach is to strike at
the sensitive area around the maw. If a nay-churr is reduced to 0 hit
points by a series of hits on its maw, it immediately expels the con-

 

tents of its stomach and becomes inert, neither moving nor swallow-
ing, for a period of up to several weeks.

A nay-churr attacked in this fashion is not dead. The only way to
kill the creature is to strike exclusively at the stomach until it is re-
duced to 0 hit points—whereupon the stomach explodes 1d6 rounds
later, killing the nay-churr but also causing 10d10 points of damage to
anyone or anything inside it and 5d10 points of damage to anything
else within 200 feet. (From the standpoint of someone inside the crea-
ture, this sort of cure be worse than the disease.)

Trying to escape by hacking through the stomach from the inside
can have disastrous consequences. If the inner wall of the stomach is
damaged even slightly by an attack, the nay-churr will go immedi-
ately into a state of instinctive panic and convulsion—moving for-
ward at a rate of 18 and thrashing violently from side to side as it does
so. Any objects or creatures inside it are thrown around with such
force that further attacking is impossible, and the victims suffer 1d10
points of damage per round from impacts with other objects or de-
bris.

A nay-churr does voluntarily disgorge the contents of its stomach
on occasion: whenever the creature happens to be inside the air enve-
lope of some object that it isn't capable of swallowing, such as a
planet or a large ship (100 tons or more), The result is a rain of debris
in the direction of the gravity plane of the planet or ship.

Habitat/Society: Nay-churr are native to the phlogiston, and this is
where they are the happiest (if such a term can be used). There they
can cruise endlessly, sucking up a never-ending and never-tilling sup-
ply of the ether. However, they have been known to drift into wild-
space through a portal in a crystal sphere (nay-churr cannot penetrate
a crystal sphere on their own).

Ecology: Aside from their mindless, chaotic propensity for swallow-
ing anything they encounter, nay-churr play no part in the ecology of
the multiverse. However, if a sufficiently large piece of the outer
stomach wall of a nay-churr can be salvaged after an explosion, it can
be formed into a breastplate that retains its Armor Class of —2.
Phlog-Crawler

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any space
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Life energy
INTELLIGENCE: Non-(0)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1
ARMOR CLASS: 4
MOVEMENT: 6

HIT DICE: 5

THACO: Special
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: Special
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Affected only by spells
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

 

SIZE: M (5'-7" long)
MORALE: Fearless (20)
XP VALUE: 1,400

The phlog-crawler is a form of phlogiston entity. It takes the form
of a piece of the phlogiston and enjoys total access to wildspace. It
travels in both the flow and wildspace alike, in search of prey for
its voracious appetite. It moves about apparently propelled sim-
ply by its desire.

The crawler, from a distance, appears to be a small cloud with
eight writhing appendages (giving it a spider-like appearance)
floating in space. Up close, however, the swirling, rainbow colors
of the phlogiston become apparent. Because the phlog-crawler
has no defined shape and no known mass, it can move freely
through even the smallest cracks and crevices. Inside the phlogis-
ton, the crawler is virtually undetectable at distances greater than
melee range.

Combat: The phlog-crawler has no motivation other than hun-
ger. Because its appetite is seemingly endless, to see a phlog-
crawler is to be attacked by a phlog-crawler. The creature attacks
by coming in contact with its intended prey and draining Strength
from it. No type of armor offers any protection from this attack.
Each round that the victim is in contact with a phlog-crawler, he
must roll a saving throw vs. breath weapon. If he fails the saving
throw, the victim loses 1 point of Strength. Upon reaching 0
Strength he is dead. If the victim manages to escape from or kill
the crawler, he regains lost Strength at a rate of 1 point per turn.

Attacking a phlog-crawler is, at best, a difficult undertaking.
Because the crawler is little more than a mist, it is immune to non-
magical weapons. Even magical weapons inflict negligible
damage—1 point per bonus of the weapon (e.g., along sword +2
would inflict 2 points of damage on a successful hit).

The only other way to damage a phlog-crawler is to burn it or
use spells. The former method is a dangerous prospect indeed.
Any flame—magical or otherwise—coming in contact with a
phlog-crawler can certainly destroy it, but it causes the creature
to erupt in the equivalent of a 5-die fireball, causing damage to
anyone in a radius equal to twice the length of the crawler.

Using spells to fight the phlog-crawler is a far less dangerous af-
fair. However, anyone in contact with the crawler is also subject
to any spells cast at the crawler. For example, if a 3rd-level wizard
casts a magic missile spell at a phlog-crawler that is draining one
of his companions, both the crawler and the companion would
suffer the damage.

La

 

A phlog-crawler has the ability to sense open flames and will
not approach them. If a flame is lit during combat, there is a 75%
chance that the creature will flee at maximum speed away from
the encounter. It is also unlikely to attack any large group of indi-
viduals unless it has not fed in a long while.

The phlog-crawler causes the air pocket of any object less than
one ton in mass that it comes in contact with to foul and then be-
come poisonous in half the usual amount of time.

Habitat/Society: Phlog-crawlers are found in both the phlogiston
and wildspace alike. Because individuals and small groups—the
primary prey of the crawlers—are unlikely to be encountered
within the phlogiston, phlog-crawlers are encountered mostly in
wildspace. Because of their vulnerability to ranged attacks and
flames, they tend to hide among rocks and ship ruins and attack
by surprise. Phlog-crawlers can survive for up to 24 hours within
an atmosphere, but they rarely enter one.

Ecology: Phlog-crawlers have no diet other than the life energy of
living creatures. They can sense the presence of life up to several
miles away and attack any small groups of people automatically
(unless they have an open flame, of course). If the creature is
starved and has not fed for some time—usually after several
weeks—it will attack anything without heed for its own safety.

Phlog-crawlers have no known natural enemies. Their life cy-
cle is unknown, but some of the great sages of Toril speculate that
they are virtually immortal. In some crystal spheres, captured
phlog-crawlers (a very rare thing indeed) are used to make pow-
erful potions of longevity.
Pirate of Gith

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Wildspace
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Ship/Military
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (15-16)
TREASURE: A (N)
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil
NO. APPEARING: 20-40//As ship crew
ARMOR CLASS: 0
MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 7-11

THACO: Special

NO, OF ATTACKS: Varies
DAMAGE/ATTACK: By weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (6'-7' tall)
MORALE: Champion (16)
XP VALUE: Special

When the githyanki, under their liberator, Gith, freed themselves
from the yoke of mindflayer slavery, this branch of the race fled
not to the Astral plane, but to arcane space.

Tall, emaciated beings, the pirates of Gith appear as almost
skeletal humanoids with skin varying from dirty gray to dull yel-
low. Long, dingy-brown hair flows down their backs and over
the ornate, bejeweled arms and armor they prefer to use.

Combat: The pirates of Gith can operate as fighters, mages, or
fighter/mages, with limits of 11 in each class. Typically, the
highest-level fighter captains the ship. This frees all the mages
(single-and multiclassed) for spelljamming or combat duty.

Clerics of Gith are occasionally encountered as well (limit of
11th level). Rarely, a fighter/cleric is encountered, almost always
as the captain of its ship.

When closing with a foe, the pirates use spells and any arma-
ment their ship possesses. In melee, they use a variety of weap-
ons, with various swords predominating.

Operating from small bases hidden on asteroids, the pirates
strive to capture any ship that is larger, faster, or better armed
than theirs. They feverishly attempt to capture any elven-made
ships that come their way (see below). Asa result, many elven ar-
madas post large bounties on the heads of Gith pirates.

The pirates’ greatest fury is reserved for the illithids, however.
The pirates of Gith spare no expense to kill all mindflayers they
find, No Gith pirate ever uses a captured illithid ship.

A ship's complement varies, but these numbers are a general
guideline:

1 Captain (highest-level fighter or fighter/ cleric)
1 Mate (highest-level fighter/mage or cleric)
1 Chief Spelljammer or Warlock (highest-level mage)

The rest of the crew is evenly divided among the three common
class possibilities.

Habitat/Society: The pirate philosophy carries over into all as-
pects of life. The strongest take what they want. Each ship is very

 

 

 

 

 

 

important to its crew, as it is the primary factor in determining
the pecking order in a settlement. This explains the pirates’ con-
stant quest for better ships. Each settlement is ruled by force by its
best ship, or a coalition of the best ships.

Extreme isolationists, the pirates of Gith live with no other
races—they may even try to commit genocide on a race that set-
tles too close to them, Over all, despite being pirates, these Gith
live a structured, militaristic lifestyle.

Every adult member of this race possesses the following magi-
cal abilities, each usable three times a day: astral spell, plane
shift, and ESP. All function as the spell of the same name (as cast
by the lowest-level caster possible). These inherent abilities also
enable the pirates to pilot ships with series helms. These abilities
function only in wildspace, not in the phlogiston.

The most dangerous aspect of this race is a combination of the
above abilities, the properties of major and minor spelljamming
helms, and the unique organic structure of the elven-made ships.
When a Gith pirate is at the helm of an elven-made ship (flitter,
etc.), he may use his plane shift and astral spell abilities to shunt
the entire ship, and all its contents, to the Astral plane (this uses
up that pirate's astral spell and plane shift abilities for the day).
This gives the pirates an escape route, and it enables them to wait
in known shipping lanes, astrally hidden, before returning to the
Prime Material plane to launch an attack. The Gith pirates can
use only elven-made ships of less than 50 tons in this way.

This special maneuver only works in wildspace, not in the
phlogiston. That is certainly the reason the Gith pirates never
pursue prey into that medium.

Ecology: The Gith pirates are carnivores, pure and simple. They
do not care what state, short of putrefied, the meat is in. Some of
the pirate bands also engage in cannibalism.
Plasman

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any land, fire-based worlds, cool
stars

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Special

INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)

TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil

NO. APPEARING: I

ARMOR CLASS: 2

MOVEMENT: 9, Fl12(C)

HIT DICE: 12

THACO: 9

NO. OF ATTACKS: _ y a

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-16 or 3-18

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Heat blast

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

 

SIZE: H (12' tall)
MORALE: Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: 8,000

Plasmen are the peculiar constructs of deranged wizards, con-
jured simultaneously from the elemental planes of Fire and Earth.
Bizarre and completely unnatural (even from a magical stand-
point), plasmen are internally at war with themselves. They take
out their inner turmoil in a horrible frenzy of destruction that is
usually as dangerous for their creators as for anyone else. In their
rage they quickly break down into their material components of
fire and earth, though some who make their way to fire-based
worlds or stars can attain immortality in these places where the
elemental planes of Fire and Earth are in harmony in the Prime
Material plane.

A plasman is a horrifying creature, roughly man-shaped but
much taller. Its exterior is a broken collection of what appear to
be white-hot coals or stones, stacked unnaturally into the shape
of a man. From within it burns with the fire of a kiln, the intense
light and flame licking out from between the stones, dancing
across its surface in a constant swirl of deadly, searing heat. Plas-
men have no facial features, not even a mouth—sustenance is
gained by simply merging with rock or metal, melting it and
smearing it onto its body, or by absorbing flame or combustible
materials (wood, oil, cloth, etc.) to feed its inner fire.

Combat: A plasman is at war with itself and with all creatures
that cross its path, It shows no mercy, attacking without regard to
situation, alignment, or even its own estimation of victory. A
plasman’s only attack is to punch with its flaming fist. If a hit is
scored, the target suffers 2d8 points of crushing damage from the
rock-hard fist, plus 2d6 points of flame damage. The flame dam-
age is also incurred even by casual contact with a plasman.
Plasmen also have a special attack they can use once per turn, If
the plasman spends an entire round not attacking, on the next
round it can concentrate its internal fires into a blast of intense

 

heat. This blast attack scorches victims within five feet for 3d6
points of damage, those within ten feet for 2d6 points of damage.
and those within 20 feet for 1d6 points of damage (all victims get
to roll saving throws vs. spell for half damage).

In combat, a plasman cannot be harmed by weapons of less
than +2 enchantment. Of these weapons, edged ones cause only
half damage to the flowing, molten stones of a plasman’s outer
shell. Fire-based spells have no effect on plasmen. No common
means of extinguishing fire on the Prime Material plane is capable
of harming a plasman. Spells of magical cold and water inflict
normal damage. Spells that alter stone work normally. An entire
gallon of water poured onto a plasman causes 1d6 points of dam-
age.

Habitat/Society: Once conjured, plasmen have no loyalty to their
creators, attacking them as readily as anyone else. They survive
for 1d6 days after their creators stop concentrating on them. Af-
ter that, they collapse back into the hot coals of a wood fire, the
very stuff from which they were created.

If a plasman can reach a fire-based world or a star before it
burns out, it can survive there indefinitely. Still troubled and vio-
lent, it takes to the space around those places, hovering, waiting
for passersby on which to vent its burning anger.

Ecology: Plasmen have little purpose in any ecosystem. They
contribute only death and destruction. There are no known uses
for any part of plasmen.
Plasmoid, General

 

 

 

Plasmoids are a group of beings that have no set shape. Space
sages theorize that the simple amoeba magically developed into
the various oozes, slimes, and jellies, and these in turn developed
into the species of plasmoids. All plasmoids can alter their shape
at will.

Plasmoid Biology: Plasmoids are extremely dexterous, able to
manipulate every fiber of their being. When plasmoids sleep or
lose consciousness, they lose their rigidity and ooze to conform to
the area they are in. This can be a very dangerous thing for plas-
moids, thus they select their sleeping chambers with great care.

Plasmoids can alter the fibers of their bodies to form interior
pouches for carrying items, limbs to use as legs, arms, tails,
heads, etc., and air pockets that can be squeezed to produce
sound.

Their nerves are massed into groups called ganglia. These can
be sensitized to detect light, heat, texture, sound, pain, and vibra-
tions. They can partially expose their ganglia in order to adjust
the sensitivity of their various perceptions. Thus, they could hear
a butterfly up to 100 yards away, or totally cover these nerves to
become effectively deaf. However, if they are listening to a but-
terfly and someone makes a noise as loud as common speech, it is
very likely that this will damage their ganglia, as they do not have
the built in protective responses which normal ears have. Thus
they typically keep their senses at a normal (human) level and
only alter them in extreme situations.

Plasmoids do not have internal organs as we know them. Their
bodies are composed of fibers, generic cells, plasma-like ooze, ex-
cretion sacs, and nerves, They can manipulate their fibers to
function as muscle tissue. Generic cells can form lining, covering,
and cavities. The cavities are filled with carried items, acid for di-
gestion and attack, food, drink, liquid for rigidity, and air for
bodily functioning (breathing) and speech. They speak by forcing
air out of tubular cavities that constrict to produce sound. The
plasma is used for transportation of bodily fluids, energy to fi-
bers, etc. Finally their tiny excretion sacs convert digested food
into chemicals—acid, energy compounds, etc.

The only constant organ of a plasmoid is its brain, which is
simply a giant mass of nerves like a huge ganglia.

Plasmoids breathe by absorbing oxygen through exposed
plasma. Thus they must have an oozy area exposed to the air.
They eat by surrounding food like an amoeba. Thus, they need
no real mouths. Yet, it is not uncommon for them to form a
mouth-like cavity simply to appease other races and to protect
their plasma. Since they can store air within their bodies, they can
“hold their breath” for up to an hour. Furthermore, their immu-
nity to poison and other toxins enables them to treat each cate-
gory of air quality as one better.

Most plasmoids have the ability to form some type of bodily
coating. This coating and its use varies from one species to the
next.

Plasmoids excrete by oozing their bodily waste products from
pores. They tend to do this constantly, which produces an slime
trail wherever they go. Since they don’t detect odor, they have a
hard time understanding other races’ revulsion to this act.

All plasmoids reproduce by joining with another of their spe-
cies, exchanging DNA material, and then at any latter time de-
sired (from instantly to years in the future), they simply divide in
half. One of the plasmoid is the original; the other is a near dupli-
cate except it starts with only a base knowledge (whatever the
parent could spare).

Plasmoids can alter their mass and weight as well as their form.
This is done by absorbing a lot of food and drink and growing
just as a water balloon does. They can manufacture more fibers,
nerves, and cells to accommodate this larger size. Of course this
takes time, just as it takes time for a human to gain weight.
Shrinking is a nearly instantaneous process; the plasmoid simply

divides, leaving a blob of unwanted body material behind.

A large plasmoid can last for several] months without eating.
but it must absorb liquids at least once a day or it will dry out (1d8
points of damage per day).

Because plasmoids can alter their fiber composition, they can
also alter their strength. If they put all of their fibers into one large
body muscle, they can lift massive weights.

Plasmoids are all very heavy because of their liquid content.

Combat: All known plasmoids are immune to disease and poi-
sons of all types. Acid does not harm them unless massive quanti-
ties (a barrel or more) is used. Cold-based attacks only slow them
down unless the temperature is extreme, Heat causes great dam-
age to a plasmoid, as it dries them out. Unless a plasmoid is in a
protective covering, exposure to dry environments (such as a des-
ert) causes 1d8 points of damage every day.

Piercing weapons tend to cause little to no damage to a plas-
moid, because of their plasma composition. Slashing weapons
are a little more effective, while bludgeoning attacks cause full
damage.

Plasmoids are capable of attacking with multiple limbs. These
can wield weapons, if the plasmoid desires. Because they have
tremendous control over their bodies, there is no penalty for the
number of attacks listed above. However, each additional attack-
ing limb above the indicated number causes a ~2 cumulative
penalty to all limbs’ attack rolls. Shield-wielding limbs count as
attacking limbs. Legs and other nonattacking limbs, no matter
how many, don’t count. Each shield lowers a plasmoid’s AC by 1.

Plasmoids are usually most proficient with bludgeoning weap-
ons, as these are most effective upon enemy plasmoids. Piercing
weapons are shunned. They also prefer not to wear armor as it
hampers their ability to transform. However, shields are widely
used.

Habitat/Society: Most plasmoidal societies are of the clan type.
There is a hierarchy among the clan, but it is rarely enforced or
attended to. Plasmoids have very strong ties to others of their
species. It is very rare for plasmoids of enemy camps to directly
combat one another. Space sages theorize that this is because all
plasmoids came from a single original plasmoid of its species and
thus they are all pseudo-clones of one another.

Plasmoids love treasure and power. Thus adventuring has at-
tracted their attention, particularly space with its endless possi-
bilities. Plasmoids enjoy philosophical debates, storytelling, and
they are commonly employed in the political arena because of
their near-tireless ability to speak about nothing at great length.

Plasmoids are easily entertained and nearly as easily fasci-
nated. They have a child-like curiosity that frequently lands them
in undesirable situations. A final bad habit of plasmoids is their
tendency to eat (absorb) things at random, occasionally things of
importance to other beings.

Plasmoid loyalty is a thing of legend. Thus the saying, “If you
want a friend to stick with you into the void, choose a plasmoid.”
However, this doesn’t mean that they are beyond deceit.

Ecology: Plasmoids have a near scavenger-like appetite. Since
they cannot taste or smell and are immune to disease, poison, and
most acid, they eat virtually anything. Nondigestible matter is
simply expelled at a later time. Their body acids are strong
enough to eat through anything but metal, stone, and glass. In
fact, the first plasmoid venture into space failed simply because
they used a wooden vessel, which they absentmindedly snacked
upon when bored. Plasmoids have been banished from the or-
ganic elven ships.

The only natural enemy of plasmoids is the greatly feared bur-
bur. Of course, they generally dislike most fire-breathing crea-
tures as well.
Plasmoid, DeGleash

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Non-arid/ Any
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Family
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Scavenger
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: K, L, M, (D)
ALIGNMENT: Any (seldom evil)
NO. APPEARING: 1-6

ARMOR CLASS: 2
MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 8

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1-4+
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-8 or weapon +3
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Boom, absorb
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M-H (varies)
MORALE: Average (10)
XP VALUE: 10,000

See “Plasmoid—General” for base information on this race.

DeGleash are large, wet blobs that favor a form resembling a
bowling pin (a fat base with a narrowing upper body). They are
white to cream colored and constantly sway and bob about, They
prefer to use no legs, propelling themselves forward by having
their bases flow over the surface. They can do this at rate of 9.
They also prefer to form only enough arms for the task at hand
(thus they have no arms when not trying to manipulate some-
thing). These arms tend to be short and stalk-like. They employ
two ganglia masses for eyes, which they usually place high on
their bodies. Their auditory nerves are usually scattered about
their body. Waste constantly excretes via osmosis through their
thin outer membrane. They rarely form a mouth orifice.

DeGleash can produce four arms of 18/01-18/50 strength. If all
of their fibers are put into one slow muscle (not for attack) they
can lift as much as 10,000 Ibs. for short durations (1d4 rounds).

They can form appendages as fine as a '/16 inch in diameter.
They can absorb or produce limbs as fast as a human can move
his arm. DeGleash have such incredible contro] over their bodies
that a net cast over a deGleash would slowly pass through its
body if it desired (it just disconnects nerves and fibers where the
net's strands are passing, then reconnects them afterward).

The least malleable part of a deGleash is its brain, but even that
can be quickly squashed into a five-inch diameter tube that is one
foot long. If a deGleash spends several hours, it can slowly string
its brain out to fit through a hole only one inch in diameter (the
smallest hole a deGleash can pass through).

A man-sized deGleash can stretch thin enough to reach some-
thing 50 feet in the air (large-sized ones can reach 75 feet, huge
one can stretch 100 feet). To stretch this thin requires one round.
Likewise a deGleash could move through a one-foot-diameter
hole in a round. Smaller holes take a lot more time, up to several
hours to fit through a one-inch hole.

DeGleash can secrete a calcium-based substance that quickly
hardens and forms a shell around them. This is too fragile to add
to their AC, but it is useful to keep them from flowing all over
while they sleep. When they wake, they reabsorb the shell.

They can carry up to 1,200 Ibs. of items within their bodies if
the items’ overall volume is a cubic yard or less. DeGleash them-
selves weigh 2,000, 4,000, and 8,000 lbs, (for size M, L, and H, re-
spectively). They are incapable of jumping, but they can climb

 

 

 

 

 

walls with 90% success.

Combat: DeGleash can use 1d4 arms in combat with no penalties.
Additional arms inflict a —2 attack roll penalty for all arms. They
prefer to attack with two pseudopod fists and wield two shields
(AC 0). They can strike an opponent up to 8’ away with full
strength (greater distances reduce the damage by 2 points per
foot).

DeGleash get very excited before and during combat. It is a
habit of this species to begin booming at this time. Opponents
who hear this terrible sound must roll successful saving throws
vs. petrification or be struck with dread (penalties of +2 and-2 on
combat rolls). If a deGleash concentrates for one round, it can re-
lease a tremendous boom that requires all within 20 feet to make
saving throws vs. paralyzation or become deaf for 1d20 rounds
(+2 penalty to AC). Finally, deGleash can envelop enemies who
are at least one size smaller than they. This requires a THACO
roll, adjusted only by the victim's Dexterity. Once enveloped, a
victim suffers 1d8 points of digestive damage per round. Further-
more, if the deGleash concentrates, it can bring its muscle fibers
to bear upon the hapless foe holding him with an effective
Strength of 20, causing 8 additional points of damage a round, If
the victim is not held, a successful bend bars roll enables him to
move; if held, three consecutive successful bend bars rolls must
be made. Of course, suffocation is a problem for those enveloped
as well.

DeGleash suffer no damage from piercing weapons, !/2 damage
from slashing weapons, and full damage from bludgeoning weap-
ons. Fire causes double damage. Cold-based attacks slow them by
1 per 10 dice of damage.

As with all plasmoids, deGleash are immune to disease and
poison of all types. Only acid damage in excess of 30 points per
round can harm them.

A deGleash’s AC is due to its ability to shape its body away
from an attacking blow. It can even open into a ring.

Habitat/Society: See the comments under “Plasmoid—General.”
Plasmoid, DelNoric

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any

 

 

 

 

 

 

FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Family
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Scavenger
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)
TREASURE: K, L, M, (D)
ALIGNMENT: Any (seldom good)
NO. APPEARING: 2-8

ARMOR CLASS: 3 (8)
MOVEMENT: 6

HIT DICE: 5

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1-3 +
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d6 or weapon +2
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Squeal, acid
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 5%

SIZE: S-L (waries)
MORALE: Steady (12)

XP VALUE: 4,000

See “Plasmoid—General” for base information on this race.

DelNorics prefer a short, stocky bi- or multipedal form. Their
arms and legs are usually identical. They prefer mitten-like
hands, round, stump-like feet, and a neckless head. They have
two auditory and two visual ganglia, which they place upon their
heads in the locations common to most bipeds. They also form a
mouth orifice and even occasionally produce slight nose-like ap-
pendages (even though they can't smell).

What distinguishes delNorics from the other plasmoids is their
covering, They can form a half-inch-thick, stiff leathery hide.
This hide is simply a mesh of their body fibers that they allow to
dry out. As it grows thicker, it often cracks where the delNoric
bends. DelNorics usually look like they have wide strips of
leather hanging off their bodies. This coating is grey to brown in
coloration.

DelNorics have a lot less plasma than most plasmoids. For this
reason, it takes them much longer to transform. A typical ap-
pendage requires a full turn of concentration. They cannot flow
with their covering in place and thus they form legs for locomo-
tion. With their covering, delNorics cannot form an appendage
smaller than five inches in diameter. Without the covering, a one-
inch-diameter appendage can be formed. If they must form fin-
gers, they tear holes in their covering and extend unprotected
appendages. A delNoric’s brain cannot be squashed any smaller
that a five-inch-diameter area.

DelNorics can support 12,000 Ibs. for several hours when con-
tained within their covering.

They commonly have several lip-like areas on their bodies.
These open into leather coated pouches in which they keep their
possessions. DelNorics are capable of carrying 1,000 lbs. of
items. However, since these must be very dense in order to be of
small enough volume, this amount is rarely carried.

Small-sized delNorics can stretch their bodies upward to a
height of ten feet (15 feet if man-sized, 20 feet if large).

A delNoric’s covering protects it from drying out, thus it can
adventure even in desert climates, It also enables it to sleep while
only marginally losing its form.

Combat: DelNorics can employ 1d3 appendages for attack and
defense with no penalty. Each additional appendage inflicts the
—2 cumulative attack roll penalty common to all plasmoids.

 

 

 

 

 

If they concentrate (no actions for a round), delNorics can “in-
hale” a large volume of air and then force it out of a small hole (of-
ten their pseudo-mouth) for the next 1d4 rounds. This causes a
loud squealing sound that requires a saving throw vs. paralyza-
tion or it inflicts 1d4 points of damage to all who can hear it
within 20 feet (even other delNoric).

Furthermore, delNorics keep their supply of entire digestive
acid in one internal container, They usually form a tube that exits
their body in some convenient area for expelling this acid onto an
opponent. This requires their full concentration, The expelled
acid can be shot in a stream up to 20 feet to strike one opponent,
or it can be sprayed in a mist upon all those within a cone ten feet
long and five feet in diameter (at the far end). The stream causes
2d10 points of damage, while the cone causes 3d4 points of dam-
age to each victim, The stream requires a normal attack roll for
the delNoric, while the cone’s victims roll saving throws vs.
breath weapon for half damage. This acid-spewing attack can be
used only once every hour.

DelNorics are slow to react; their AC is due mainly to their
tough, thick hide. Without this covering their AC is 8.

DelNorics suffer half damage from piercing and slashing weap-
ons, but full damage from bludgeoning weapons. Furthermore,
their thick hide allows fire-based attacks to cause only half their
normal damage (though double damage without the hide). Every
20 points of cold damage slows them by 1 (every 10 points if no
hide). Acid in any quantity inflicts no damage.

Habitat/Society: DelNorics have a particular enmity toward de-
Gleash, whom they call “The Soft Ones.” They have taken a lik-
ing to dwarves as well as to the dwarven lust for gold.

Ecology: DelNorics eat anything, though for some unknown rea-
son (not due to taste or smell), they have taken a particular liking
to meat. DelNoric hides are sought after to make leather shields
and breast plates. Such armor has half the weight of metal armor,
but the same durability.
Plasmoid, Ontalak

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any remote
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: When approached
DIET: Scavenger
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: A
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 8
MOVEMENT: 3

HIT DICE: 16+
THACO: 10

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 or multiple

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-8 hull points or 2-20
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Acid
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 10%

 

 

SIZE: G (as per ship)
MORALE: Champion (15)
XP VALUE: 17,000

Ontalaks can produce a covering made of fibrous material that
has the density of any material from brass to cloth, They have
learned to make coverings of interest to those they feed upon.

A common ontalak tactic in wildspace is to form the covering
to resemble a wrecked ship. When spacefaring adventurers come
along, they will often stop at the wrecked ship to investigate and
plunder her. When the ontalak becomes aware of the presence of
others, it waits until the ship gets close enough to attack or the
crew boards it. It then attacks for the sole purpose of gaining
food.

Ontalaks enter a dormant state when not in combat. In this
state an ontalak can last for years between feedings.

Ontalaks can stretch their pseudopods to the limit of their air
bubble. The smallest ontalak ever found had 16 Hit Dice and was
the size of a wasp spelljammer; most specimens are larger.

Ontalaks create a large ball that is kept in their interiors; when
a heavy concentration of ontalak acid is poured onto it, it func-
tions as a major spelljamming helm. Ontalaks can move overland
like deGleash, but this is a relatively slow process due to the onta-
laks' great size (movement of 3).

Combat: Ontalaks attack with giant pseudopods that come up
out of the hatch, cracks in the deck, and other areas of the “ship”
they form. These cause 2d10 points of damage each. The number
of such pseudopods any given ontalak can create equals the aver-
age crew complement of the ship it is masquerading as. At best an
ontalak can attack a single, man-sized opponent with only two of
its pseudopods, These attacks are with a THACO of 10 because it
sees its opponents via many tiny nerve endings scattered over its
pseudopods like hair, resulting in a rather blurry picture.

Any attack roll of a natural 20 by an ontalak means that it has
grasped its opponent. In this case, roll 1d4 to determine what it
will do with the victim:

1 Retract the pseudopod and absorb the victim for digestion

2 Toss into space

3 Extend to edge of air envelope and drop victim (falling dmg)

4 Smash victim into deck and opponents (2d10 dmg)

An absorbed victim suffers 2d20 points of acid damage per round

and escape is virtually impossible. Someone trapped within can

attack with a dagger or smaller weapon if it is in hand.
Ontalaks can also pump their digestive acid up through a spe-

 

cial pseudopod that they always have ready. This pseudopod
looks like a plunger and can fasten itself onto the hull of an enemy
vessel. Once attached, it can cause 1d6 points of hull damage per
round if it concentrates fully on the attack, Odamages often grab
the ship with their other pseudopods and pull it closer.

Most ontalak pseudopods are from one to three feet in diame-
ter, thus they can be cut off only by a vorpal blade or a sword of
sharpness. To stop any one pseudopod from functioning, the en-
tire being must be killed.

Ontalaks suffer no damage from piercing weapons, half dam-
age form slashing weapons, and full damage from bludgeoning
weapons. Fire-based attacks cause double damage. Cold-based
attacks have no effect. As with all plasmoids, they are immune to
poison and disease. They are also completely immune to acid.

An ontalak’'s ship-like covering has the same statistics as a real
ship of that type (hull points, SR=2, NR = D, and saves as soft
metal). Once the hull is destroyed, the ontalak retracts all pseu-
dopods and covers itself in a thick excretion of tar-like acid (1d12
points of damage per round of contact). It also tries to spelljam
away if possible. Note that all damage upon the fake hull is calcu-
lated normally, and this damage also affects the ontalak. How-
ever, such damage is adjusted as per the Ontalak’s plasmoidal
properties (ballistae do nothing to it, for example).

Habitat/Society: Ontalaks rarely encounter each other except for
breeding purposes. Reports say that a huge armada of ghost ships
gathers in deep wildspace once a year.

Ontalaks can be found masquerading as other things, such as a
wooden house in a forest, a ghost ship on the high seas, and occa-
sionally a haunted house. Ontalaks sometimes re-absorb their
covering and live in a real abandoned ship or dwelling.

Ecology: As with all plasmoids, ontalaks eat nearly anything they
can digest. If an ontalak is killed, it releases an acid that causes
damage to its covering equal to half its hull points.
Puffer

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any space

FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore

INTELLIGENCE: High (13-14)

TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 4

MOVEMENT: 15 (active only)

HIT DICE: 9

THACO: 11

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-12/1-6

SPECIAL ATTACKS: poison stinger

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: _— Standard

SIZE: M (12' long) active state
L (20'-40’ diam.) dormant state

MORALE: Fanatic (18)

XP VALUE: 2,000

The puffer is a durable creature that can bear the rigors of wild-
space for years at a time while in its dormant state. Yet, when it
lands upon an asteroid or ship and becomes active, it can become
a terrible killing machine, often leaving a wasteland in its wake.

In its dormant state the puffer resembles a tightly-stretched
balloon—a featureless sphere floating through wildspace. It can
be as large as 40' in diameter, or perhaps as small as half that, de-
pending on how long it has been dormant. Upon close inspection,
its smooth skin looks obviously different from an asteroid or
other natural object.

When active, the puffer resembles a cross between a crocodile
and a scorpion. It has a mouthful of sharp tangs and a poison
stinger in its tail, which it keeps curled over its back, ready to
strike a foe in any direction.

A puffer can propel itself slowly through wildspace by exhaling
a small trickle of air. It cannot approach spelljammer speed, of
course, but it can sense any ship or other large object within 100
miles. The puffer slowly approaches the object and, if it can catch
it, lands and immediately becomes active.

A puffer can make some 5-10 attempts to land somewhere be-
fore its supply of air is exhausted. If this occurs before it can land,
the puffer dies in space without reproducing.

Combat: A puffer can fight only in active mode. It can be slain
when dormant, if characters reach it in wildspace. In fact, when
thus killed, its body becomes a valuable source of air. As soon as
a puffer comes into contact with more than one ton of air, how-
ever, it becomes active.

The bite of the puffer inflicts 1d12 points of damage, while the
stinger causes 1d6. In addition, those struck by the stinger must
roll a successful saving throw vs. poison or die.

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Pulfers spend most of their lives in the ultimate
seclusion—the eternal dark and cold of wildspace beyond the
outermost planets. Once in its life, however, a puffer tries to land.
After landing, it must kill some creature to serve as host for its
eggs. These it lays, and then it returns to wildspace to die.

The eggs hatch three to four weeks later, releasing 1d100 tiny,
active puffers into whatever environment fortune has placed
them (hp 1 each, AC 10, THACO 19),

These tiny puffers have stingers every bit as lethal as the
adult's. Each of them seeks a warm-blooded animal as a victim,
which they attempt to sting to death. If successful, the little puffer
devours the kill, growing quickly as it does so.

After the meal, it slowly begins to inhale air, inflating until it is
a dormant ball some 30-40' across. Then, with an expulsion of
air, it shoots slowly into wildspace at non-spelljamming speed,
where it will spend the next years or even decades.

Ecology: Pufters feed on meat, and they seek creatures of human
size or larger for their kills, They can grow and lay their eggs us-
ing smaller creatures for sustenance, but it takes many of these for
each activity, as opposed to one good-sized carcass of 150-200 lbs.

Puffers cannot survive the extreme of a fall from space to a full-
sized planet, nor can their air-blown drives carry them from a
planet into space, Thus, they confine their activities to ships, as-
teroids, and other small objects in space.
Q’nidar

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Wildspace/Temperate and Subarctic
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Pack
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Light and heat
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: None
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1-6
ARMOR CLASS: ~1 (3)
MOVEMENT: Fl 16 (C); See below
HIT DICE: 6-8
THACO: 6 HD: 15

7-8 HD: 13
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: See below
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Immune to heat, flame
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil
SIZE: H (12’-15’ long)
MORALE: Average(8-10)
XP VALUE: 1,400

The q'nidar are bat-like creatures that frequent the warmer areas
of wildspace in search of food. They appear as gigantic bats with
a semi-crystalline hide (not unlike that of the radiant dragon in
appearance). The q'nidar feed on heat and light, which can be
seen constantly arcing around and through them; from afar, these
heat and light patterns streak behind them, resembling a vapor-
ous trail. The dracon were the first to encounter these creatures
and named them “q'nidar,” or heat-eaters. The rest of the races in
space usually refer to these creatures as “vapor bats.”

The q'nidar have a unique form of communication: They
“speak” via a thermal breath that is easily detected and under-
stood by other q'nidar. Even though they feed on heat and light,
they are not always found near heat-based celestial bodies; too
much background heat confuses their senses and their speech.

Combat: Q'nidar are attracted to spelljamming ships because of
the lights and activity, as well as curiosity. In the past, q'nidar
would confuse ships with other vapor bats and “speak” with the
ships, resulting in disaster.

The breath of a q'nidar is extremely hot. It is harmless in the
void, but, when exposed to the atmospheric envelope of a ship, it
ignites the air in its path and any flammables it contacts. The
breath weapon is a cone of fire 30 feet long that is ten feet wide at
its far end. Anyone within the area of the flame suffers 2d12
points of damage, and any flammable materials must roll success-
ful saving throws or ignite. The breath also causes 1d3 points of
hull damage (wooden and organic hulls only).

The vapor bats generally wait for fires they started to build to
5-point intensity (5 hull points of damage per round), and then
they begin absorbing the heat and light from the flames. This
process extinguishes the flames in two rounds. Thus, the bats ex-
tinguish put out any flames they caused, but only if given the
chance. If attacked while “talking,” a vapor bat will scream at the
ship, causing an additional 1d12 points of damage with its breath,
and an added point of hull damage. It continues to scream until it
is no longer interrupted while feeding.

Habitat/Society: O'nidar travel in a single-line formation to feed

 

~*~

 

ee

SE
—
SSS Ee

ai,
=

 

 

 

upon the heat trails of the pack leader. Their flight in wildspace is
erratic because they get confused by background thermals, The
vapor bats have learned that much food is generated by talking
with spelljamming ships, and thus they are commonly found
along the spaceways and trade lanes of space. They are simple
creatures, meaning no malice, but they are still one of the feared
monsters of the void.

O’nidar are capable of moving at spelljamming speed (SR of 3),
but only after they have absorbed major amounts of heat and
light. If a q'nidar is brought out of spelljamming speed by a pass-
ing ship, it needs “food” to maintain its speed, and it begins
breathing on the ship to generate heat and light for its needs. Q’ni-
dar rarely need to absorb more than 5 or 6 points of heat energy
before returning to spelljamming speed.

Q'nidar are never found in the phlogiston except in their rare,
crystalline form (see “Ecology”). In the phlogiston, the vapor
bats’ breath causes a constant fireball about the q'nidar and effec-
tively kills them by overabsorption of heat. Q'nidar killed in the
phlogiston this way have a different crystal structure, and this
crystal is quite useful for creating a crystal ball. Q’nidar subjected
to fireballs of greater Hit Dice than their own will absorb all the
heat and light, forming this same crystal.

Ecology: The hides of the q'’nidar make effective components of
heat-and light-based spells. When heated, the scales are quite ef-
fective for extra lighting. Remains of the q'nidar are rarely en-
countered, outside of those killed along the tradeways.

Responding to some racial instinct, the dying q'nidar dive to-
ward the nearest star, absorbing heat and light until their bodies
crystalize fully. Often, these bodies of crystal simply get pulled
into the star, but some have been recovered. The crystalline for-
mation reacts like a spelljamming helm, absorbing not only heat
and light, but magic. The crystalline remains may be carved into
a small chair, creating a minor spelljamming helm.

 
Rastipede

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any space
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Nest
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)
TREASURE: G(R, U)
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1-6
ARMOR CLASS: 3
MOVEMENT: 15

HIT DICE: 5

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-10

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Standard
SIZE: M (6' long)
MORALE: 12

XP VALUE: 270

The rastipede is an insect-like creature that can be encountered
virtually anywhere, usually accompanying a wide variety of
other creatures. A rastipede has a hard shell covering its body,
which accounts for its low Armor Class. This is fortunate, since
their odd body shape makes it impossible for them to wear any
standard type of armor protection.

Rastipedes have long lower bodies, Their eight legs enable
them to scoot around very quickly. They also have a vaguely hu-
manoid torso and one pair of arms. They strike spacefarers as a
kind of insectoid centaur.

The rastipede has a pair of antennae on its head that provide it
with a very keen sense of smell. This sense is so keen that the ras-
tipede cannot be surprised by a creature behind it, as long as that
creature exudes any odor whatsoever, Also, the rastipede is ambi-
dextrous and fully double-jointed.

Combat: Rastipedes can use the full range of weapons available to
humans. Their specialty is a long bow designed and used specifi-
cally by their race. This long bow has ranges of 10/20/30, and it
inflicts 1d12 points of damage on a successful hit.

Rastipedes are inherently peaceful, however. This accounts for
their preference for a missile weapon in combat. Also, the speed
of these insectoids enables them to avoid many an unpleasant
encounter.

Habitat/Society: Rastipedes are born from eggs, which are laid by
a queen that reputedly lives deep within ground in a secluded ca-
vern, wherever these creatures have nests. Rastipedes grow up
with a strong sense of duty and responsibility to the nest and the
community. All rastipedes are well taught in the literature of their
own race, which is quite extensive, and mathematics.

A nest of rastipedes might contain anywhere from 100-600 in-
dividuals, half of which are immature, incapable of combat. The
adults, however, are fanatically committed to the defense of the
nest above all else.

 

 

 

 

 

Many rastipedes study the magical arts. About 1 in 6 rastipedes
encountered is a mage of Ist through 4th level. Though no ras-
tipede has ever been known to learn a spell higher than 2nd level,
they have sufficient skill to operate a spelljammer helm. In fact, a
helm operated by a rastipede performs as if operated by a mage of
three times the rastipede’s spellcasting level. Thus, a rastipede
who casts as a 4th-level mage can operate a spelljammer helm as a
12th-level mage!

The primary interest of rastipedes, however, is trade. They
commonly employ crews and hire ships to transport goods back
and forth across wildspace, usually turning a profit with every
voyage. Rastipedes engage in selling and buying of virtually any
product, though most of them adhere rigidly to laws against
smuggling or slave trafficking.

Rastipedes are favored henchmen of the arcane. Very often,
characters who seek an arcane find themselves dealing with a ras-
tipede go-between. One reason for this is the well-known bar-
gaining skill of the rastipedes. Rumors suggest a darker, more
sinister connection between the two races, but there is no evi-
dence to indicate that any such association exists.

Ecology: Rastipedes can survive on virtually any kind of food.
They need lots of water, but sunlight is apparently not a require-
ment of the race. Young rastipedes, born in the nest, might spend
their first decade underground.
Reigar

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any

 

 

 

 

 

 

FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Mainly day
DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Supra-genius (19-20)
TREASURE: Any
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral
NO. APPEARING: l

ARMOR CLASS: 2

MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE; 14

THACO: 7

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: See below
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Magic use, shakti
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Magic use, Shakti
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 45%

SIZE: M (6'-7' tall)
MORALE: Fanatic (17-18)
XP VALUE: 6,000

The reigar are a near-legendary race, only rarely encountered by
the average spacefaring adventurer. They are famed for their ar-
tistic prowess and fabulous command of craftsmanship.

As a people, the reigar are androgynous. Their men are very
beautiful and their women are extremely handsome. They are of
tall human proportions, willowy of build, with reddish-blond
hair, Their natural beauty is augmented by the halo or glory sur-
rounding each reigar. This glory is a cloud of twinkling, glittering
motes that change color in random patterns. Some rumors say
that this glory is lighter in color when the reigar is pleased, and
darker when one is displeased. This has yet to be fully docu-
mented. This glory contributes to the reigar’s tough Armor Class
and high magic resistance.

Combat: Reigar prefer not to enter into combat personally, as
their time is better spent in artistic pursuits (naturally). If at-
tacked, they first send in their helots (golem-like creatures that
have the same attacks as their organic counterparts: AC 2, MV by
creature type, HD by creature type +2, unaffected by sleep and
charm spells; helots do not have any special abilities or spell-like
abilities their organic forms may possess). If that fails, they call in
the lakshu. Only if the lakshu fail to defeat the opponents does a
reigar deign to go toe-to-toe, as it were, with the attackers, And
when it does, several hells break loose.

In combat the reigar use an item called a shakti. This is a small
(palm-sized) statuette that resembles a figurine of wondrous
power (an item rumored to have been first created by a reigar).
Each shakti is designed by and for its user, rendering each one ef-
fectively a unique item. A shakti has three purposes, or forms.

First, there is its dormant form. In this state, it may be worn
around the neck ona chain or cord, or hung from a kirtle or belt,
or carried in a pouch or bag. Its shape is reminiscent of an animal
or creature: a panther, a dragon, a phoenix, etc.

On a command word known only to the creator/user, this
form transmutes into a mode of transportation. The size increases
to roughly eight feet long, and the shape changes to that of the
creature depicted, lying prone. The reigar may sit or stand on the
shakti in this form, and by mental command will it to move or
stop. This form has a movement rate of 18 and an AC of —2.

On a second command word (also, of course, known only to

 

 

 

 

 

the creator/user), the shakti transforms into a suit of armor and
an accompanying weapon. The armor is reminiscent of the ani-
mal represented by the shakti’s dormant form, as is the special at-
tack it bestows on its wearer. The weapon can be anything from a
sword to a trident to a weighted net (use weapons tables from the
Complete Fighter's Handbook for ideas), and there is always a
magical effect released in tandem with the attack. This may be
merely for flash and effect, or it may relate to the damage caused.
For example, a sword might emit a shower of colored light when
swung at an opponent, but inflict no extra damage, or a net might
paralyze a trapped victim.

The armor is always made of a metal known only to the reigar.
It is harder than steel, with an Armor Class of 0 (not including
any magical protections put into it by the creator). More often
than not, the chest plate is decorated with an embossed head of
the animal depicted by the shakti’s form. As mentioned previ-
ously, this armor also bestows a special attack on its wearer. If the
creature depicted is a panther, for instance, the attack might be a
magical rending, performed by making a slashing motion with
the arms. If the armor represents a dragon, the attack could be a
simulation of that dragon's breath weapon, activated by placing
the wrists together with the palms facing outward. These details
are left up to the DM to create.

A third command word returns the shakti to its dormant form
from either of the other forms.

Reigar shaktis work only for their creators. Should anyone else
gain possession of a shakti by way of theft (not likely) or spoils of
battle (less likely), that shakti is inoperable. However, it is possi-
ble that a reigar might create a gift-shakti for an adventurer who
does something very, very important for the reigar—like save his
life, or provide transportation (see the “Ecology” section). This
kind of gift-shakti, though, is far less powerful—capable of mak-
ing only one kind of transformation, no more than once per day:
to vehicle, armor, or weapon (roll 1d6: 1-2 is vehicle, 3-4 is ar-
mor, 5-6 is weapon). Again, final say is up to the DM.
Reigar

Sample Shakti Statistics

Here are three known shaktis: the panther, the phoenix, and the
dragon. Use these as templates for creating more as the need

arises.
Panther
Vehicle Armor and Weapon

Armor Class: 2 0

Maneuverability

Class: Cc N/A

Hit Points: 50 N/A

Movement: 36 N/A

Size: L 8' long L (8' tall)

Damage: N/A 2d6/2d6 slashing damage;
long sword +3

Phoenix

Vehicle Armor and Weapon

Armor Class: 2 0

Maneuverability

Class: B N/A

Hit Points: 50 N/A

Movement: 39 N/A

Size: L (8’ long) L (8' tall)

Damage: N/A 3d6 fireball, 30-yard
range, 20’ radius;
mancatcher

Dragon

Vehicle Armor and Weapon

Armor Class: 2 0

Maneuverability

Class: B N/A

Hit Points: 50 N/A

Movement: 48 N/A

Size: L (8' long) L (12' tall)

Damage: N/A 4d6 +2 acid breath weapon

(spurt 70’ long, 5' wide);
war hammer +5

Habitat/Society: Legend has it that this race taught the elves
everything they know about creating beautiful items—and the
elves forgot most of it. Supposedly they also taught the dwarves
the same arts—with the same results. Their love of creation for its
own sake was also given to the tinker gnomes of Krynn, or so it is
said. (However, the gnomes did not retain the reigar's love of
beauty—they seized on the creative process and took it to a tech-
nical extreme.) It is rumored that the reigar built the first spell-
jamming helm, and never repeated the act. Their mottoes are
“Art for art's sake” and “The ends always justify the means.”

While reigar are visually stunning to begin with, they are ex-
perts at heightening their already striking appearance.

Hairstyles are an expression of individuality and, of course, ar-
tistic creativity. Men and women both may wear short or long
tresses, highly decorated or intricately styled or both. They orna-
ment themselves with fine jewelry of their own making, exquisite
raiment of their own design. Facial makeup and tattoos for both
sexes are not uncommon. This is not a function of class status or
of wealth. It is merely a fact of reigan life—one should always
strive to outdo everyone else in all aspects of life, and do it with
style, beauty, and élan. Their passion for artistic creativity ex-
tends to all aspects of their lives.

Reigar are consummate users of magical spells, especially those
that enhance the creative process. Items such as Nolzur's marvel-
ous pigments and the lyre of building are particular favorites. In
game terms, reigar are not limited to any particular school, but il-
lusions are not likely to be in their repertoire—reigar consider it

gauche to create something that isn’t real. Any spell can be con-
sidered to have artistic merit; it all depends on the time and place.
For example, offensive spells like cloudkill afford the artistic
caster a greater enjoyment of his opponents’ deaths—rather than
frying instantly, as with a fireball, the poor wretches choke,
writhe, gasp—and beg. To a reigar, this is art at its best.

The reigar as a race have been without a homeworld for millen-
nia, The rumored reason: Their pursuit of art for art's sake led
them to the total destruction of their world, using means of war-
fare never heard of before or since. The search for the ultimate ar-
tistic expression of war was carried out by reigar who were
off-world in their esthetics, with no regard for those remaining on
the ground. This is a classic example of the reigar code of
conduct— “Anything for art, nothing without style, and every-
one for himself.” Since this decimation of the race, and the de-
struction of the homeworld, the few remaining reigar have been
wandering from sphere to sphere in search of artistic inspiration.

The esthetics are biological in nature, having been created by
reigan wizards in the time of the Master Stroke (see the “Esthetic”
entry for details), It is mot known for certain whether they can be
propagated, or how this could be done should an esthetic be de-
stroyed. Each esthetic will have no more than one reigar on
board, but there is a crew of helots and lakshu to take care of the
mundane tasks.

The reigar are the source of many a legend in the universe. It is
said that, in addition to teaching the elves and dwarves every-
thing they know about craftsmanship, they are suppliers for the
arcane. This is unlikely, as it implies repetition in creation, a bane
to reigar, Art is not a repetitive process, A Reigar may well have
created the first spelljamming helm, but he would not have gone
on to mass-produce them. That would quell his artistic expression
and prevent him from pursuing the ultimate artistic experience.

Another tale told about the reigar concerns their relationships
with other races. The arcane, who look on all other races with to-
tal disdain, are said to bow to the reigar and do as the reigar tell
them, without question. Similar rumors exist about the mindflay-
ers, but these have been hotly denied by any mindflayer ques-
tioned on the subject. Still other legends would have the listener
believe that the reigar created these races themselves, as an ex-
pression of their creativity and artistic license. Some go so far as
to credit the reigar with the creation of humans—denied as hotly
by humans as the rumor about mindflayers is crushed by that spe-
cies. The neogi refer to reigar as “damn liars.” One race the reigar
are never credited with creating is the clockwork horrors: Reigar
detest these life forms as “bad art” and refer to them as
“springheads.”

Ecology: Depending on which rumors are believed, the reigar
have either had a significant effect on their environment (aside
from blowing up their own planet, of course) —or they have done
nothing but make pretty trinkets. The only unquestionable fact is
that they did destroy their homeworld, and did so with weapons
more powerful than can be imagined in present times. No one
knows for certain whether that knowledge is retained by the
reigar still in existence, but if it is, it could be very, very valuable
to anyone, and dangerous in the extreme (especially in the wrong
hands—like neogi hands).

Reigar are self-sufficient, obtaining their needs from their es-
thetics. These esthetics provide not only shelter and defenses, but
nourishment and entertainment. Their crews of helots and lakshu
are also sustained by the esthetics.

It is possible that a reigar could be commissioned to create an
item for an adventurer or a party, but the cost would be astro-
nomical (no pun intended). There is very little a normal adven-
turer could have that would interest a reigar (except transport;
see the “Esthetic” entry), but flattery goes a long way toward suc-
cessful negotiation.
Rock Hopper

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Asteroids
FREQUENCY: Common
ORGANIZATION: Clan/crew
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: U
ALIGNMENT: Lawful good
NO. APPEARING: 5-12 per skiff
ARMOR CLASS: 7
MOVEMENT: 6

HIT DICE: 2

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

 

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil

 

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Multiple bodies
MAGIC RESISTANCE; Nil

SIZE: S (3' tall)
MORALE: Average (8-10)
XP VALUE: 35

Rock hoppers are small humanoids about the size of gnomes.
Their backs and the backs of their arms and legs are covered with
very short, white hair. A much thicker, stiffer mane of hair grows
across the top of their heads. Their eyes are quite large and round,
as are their faces, Their noses are small, pointy, and covered by a
hard shell, almost like a beak. Overall, they have a very owlish
appearance.

Typical rock hopper dress consists of a short leather skirt or
kilt, a stiff vest, leather arm guards, and sandals or low boots.
They always carry a variety of tools in a shoulder bag; they often
wield knives or short swords.

Rock hoppers are almost never encountered far from their
skiffs. If they aren't traveling, they are making repairs, camped
alongside, or gathering or exploring nearby.

Combat: Rock hoppers are not combative by nature. They gener-
ally do not attack strangers unless they clearly present a threat.
Given an avenue of escape, rock hoppers usually choose discre-
tion over valor. This is not out of cowardice, but simple, honest
realization of the fact that they are weaker than most other wild-
space travelers.

Habitat/Society: Rock hoppers live in asteroid fields. They are
nomadic, so they rarely build permanent bases. When they do,
they excavate rooms and tunnels into the asteroids, often includ-
ing hangars for their skiffs.

Rock hoppers build skiffs that they use to travel between the
asteroids. These skiffs are not magical and do not carry spelljam-
ming helms. Instead they are powered by propellers that operate
from a turncrank attached to foot pedals. The pedalers sit on
benches in much the same way that rowers sit in a Viking long-
boat. A system of gears transmits their effort to a central drive
shaft that runs the length of the skiff to one or sometimes two pro-
pellers at the rear. This propeller churns through the air inside the
skiff's air envelope and moves the skiff forward. (Several scholars
who have examined the rock hopper propulsion system have de-
clared that it simply cannot work. These sages’ only response to
the fact that it obviously does work is that there is no reason why
it should, and therefore it cannot.)

Using their skiffs, rock hoppers travel from asteroid to asteroid
(their skiffs carry too little air for longer voyages), Upon reaching

 

 

 

 

 

a likely-looking spot, they raise their colorful awnings to shield
themselves from the sun, explore, maintain their skiffs, and hunt.

Their main source of food is the herds of scavvers they presum-
ably cultivated at some time in the past, but which now roam
freely throughout the asteroids. The rock hoppers follow these
herds on their migrations, pedalling out to hunt them with har-
poons when the need arises. They hunt gray and night scavvers
primarily for food, while they hunt brown scavvers for poison.
They hunt void scavvers for sport and to protect themselves.

Each rock hopper skiff carries a small cask of brown scavver
poison for use in special circumstances. Primarily, this is reserved
for those rare times when the rock hoppers encounter a kindori.
Though they do not seek out these space whales, they have been
known to kill kindori with poisoned harpoons in chases lasting
days or even weeks.

Ecology: Sages do not believe that rock hoppers are native to the
asteroids. Rather they were transplanted there long ago by some
unknown agency. It is known that they will not trade with the ar-
cane, and many sages believe that therein lies the secret of their
condition.

Rock Hopper Skiff
Built by: Rock hoppers Armor Rating: 9
Used Primarily by: Rock hoppers Saves as: Thin wood
Tonnage: i/3 to /2 ton Power Type: Pedals
Hull Points: 1 Ship's Rating: 1
Crew: 12/1 Standard

Armament: Harpoons
Maneuverability
Class: D Cargo: Va ton
Landing—Land: Yes Keel Length: 16’
Landing—Water: No Beam Length: 6!
Slinker

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any

 

 

 

 

 

FREQUENCY: Common
ORGANIZATION: Pack
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Animal (1)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1-20
ARMOR CLASS: 7
MOVEMENT: 1S

HIT DICE: V/2
THACO: 20

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

 

SIZE: T (8" long)
MORALE: Unreliable (2-4)
XP VALUE: 7

Slinkers are small, vaguely bird-like creatures. They stand ap-
proximately eight inches high on two hind legs. Their forelegs are
short and usually held close to the body when the slinkers move,
but these are also used to hold bits of food and handle small
items. The slinkers’ heads form out of the fronts of their bodies
without the nicety of any appreciable necks. They have two
closely set eyes on either side of their small beaks.

Their bodies are sparsely covered with thin, stiff hair that
ranges from light red to brown to gray to jet black. Some slinkers
also appear to be white with red, brown, and black spots. Some
naturalists believe these were once domesticated slinkers that
have returned to a wild state, though what purpose they served
domestically is unknown, A short, hairless tail (approximately
three inches long) trails behind each slinker.

Combat: Slinkers are nearly helpless in any sort of fight with a
human-sized creature. Thus they almost always flee upon catch-
ing sight of a human or demihuman, They do not attack large
creatures unless there is nowhere to run.

If backed into a corner and forced to fight, slinkers charge as
one and try to swarm over their antagonizer, Individually, slinker
bites are painful but not very dangerous. When attacking as a
group, however, they can cause serious injuries to rash charac-
ters. When slinkers attack, every slinker in the pack attacks the
same target and keeps attacking that target until either it or the
slinkers are dead.

If a group of PCs corners a pack of slinkers and the slinkers
fight, they charge the closest character, clambering over him and
burrowing under clothing and armor. The character being at-
tacked must roll a successful Dexterity check to avoid being
knocked down by the rush. Furthermore, if the number of attack-
ing slinkers is higher than the character's Dexterity score, add the
difference as a penalty to the Dexterity check die roll, (If, for ex-
ample, 18 slinkers rush a character with Dexterity 12, the charac-
ter must add 6 to his Dexterity check die roll.) Once this initial
check is made, regardless of its outcome, the character doesn't
have to roll another Dexterity check again unless another pack of
slinkers attacks him. If the character is knocked down, usual

 

 

 

 

 

attack modifiers for a prone target apply (+4 bonus for the slink-
ers’ attack rolls.

Habitat/Society: Slinkers live in packs of up to 800 individuals.
Presumably, the strongest or meanest slinker holds sway over the
others, though what sort of authority it exercises is open to de-
bate. These packs are rarely seen assembled in one place. In most
cases, no more than 20 slinkers are ever encountered at once.

Slinkers are primarily scavengers, and so they prefer to live in
areas where food and refuse is plentiful and there are lots of places
to hide. They are quite common in cities, especially in the slums
and warehouse districts of asteroid citadels (like those usually
found around dockyards).,

Ecology: In most respects, slinkers compete with rats and other
vermin for their ecological niche. The most significant differences
between them are that slinkers do not typically carry disease, and
slinkers have unusually fast metabolisms, high respiratory rates,
and short reproductive cycles.

If slinkers get aboard a spelljamming vessel, they begin repro-
ducing themselves at an alarming rate. Every week, the slinker
population aboard ship increases by 10 percent. This can become
a serious problem if the slinkers are not controlled, because they
eat a lot of food and breathe a lot of air. In one day, five slinkers
eat as much food and breathe as much air as a human crew mem-
ber. As their population increases, so does the rate at which they
consume the ship's food supply and foul its air.

To use slinkers to their maximum effect, DMs are recommended
to use Method 2 for keeping track of air quality aboard the PCs’
vessel (as described on page 12 of the Concordance of Arcane
Space). This is particularly effective if players are allowed to keep
track of their own air and food supply while the DM keeps his own,
secret record that accounts for the slinkers’ presence.

—,
Spider, Asteroid

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Asteroids
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Colony _
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: - Animal (1) a _
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1-8

ARMOR CLASS: 2/7
MOVEMENT: | 9, Wb 18

HIT DICE: 5+2

THACO: 1S

NO. OF ATTACKS: 6 or]
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-3 each or 1-6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Paralyze
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (5' wide)
MORALE: Average (9)
XP VALUE: 650

These ten-legged beasts build webs between asteroid rocks to trap
their prey.

The asteroid spider is not truly a spider, but it has enough simi-
larities to one that sailors have dubbed as such. It has ten legs,
spaced evenly around its globe-shaped body. Each is jointed like
that of a spider and ends in a small hook. On the top of the globe
are its sensory organs. The eyes are on stalks and there are several
organs of unknown use. The beasts are all black, making them
virtually invisible against most wildspace backgrounds.

The top of the globe is covered with a hard shell, like that of an
insect, but the underside is soft. The mouth is in the center of the
underbelly, as is the web-spinning organ, The mouth has a single
hollow tooth like a syringe and suction cup lips. All in all an aste-
roid spider is a hideous creature.

Combat: Against the black background of wildspace, the asteroid
spider is 90% unlikely to be seen. It attacks only those creatures
or objects that disturb its web. The attack is made with up to six
of its legs (the other four are used to hold onto the web or other
surface), Each leg inflicts 1d3 points of damage. If three or more
attacks in a single round are successful, it spider clings to the vic-
tim. Each round after that, the remaining legs can attack and the
mouth can try to bite for 1d6é points of damage. A successful bite
requires a saving throw vs. poison. Failure means the victim is
paralyzed for 2d6 turns. Paralyzed victims are bundled up in
webbing in a single round. The spider then carts the body off to
the lair to have a more leisurely meal.

Until the mouth is trying to bite, only the top of the body (AC
2) is exposed. The vulnerable underbelly (AC 7) is held close to
the web, When the mouth attacks, the belly of the spider is an
easy target,

Habitat/Society: Asteroid spiders are only found in asteroid belts
or in regions of space junk. They often set up a lair on the surtace
of a larger asteroid that has enough air to support the colony.
They spin webs miles long between their lair and the nearby aste-
roids and space junk. These webs are strong enough to trap any

 

ship under 15 tons that is not traveling at spelljamming speeds.
The webs are black, just like the spiders, and 90% unlikely to be
seen against a black wildspace sky.

The females lay hundreds of eggs on the outside of the lair.
Once the eggs hatch, it is a wild race between the hatchlings and
the adults. The adults race to catch and eat the new spiders, while
the hatchlings race to jump from the asteroid into space. Many of
the hatchlings are eaten, while many others float away and die in
wildspace. A few land on other asteroids or space junk. The
hatchlings join up with other baby asteroid spiders to form a col-
ony. When they reach adulthood, they do not accept any new spi-
ders into the colony, attacking any hatchlings or adults that enter
their territory.

Ecology: Asteroid spiders sometimes wait years between meals
They can go into a form of suspended animation, only waking up
when their webbing is disturbed. In this state they use little or no
air. After a meal, they expand their web a bit and then return to
this catatonic state.

The asteroid spiders value the air of their victims. They spin a
large cocoon of webbing within the air space of a captured ship.
When completed, it is sealed and carried to the lair, where it is de-
flated. The colony carries the cocoon back and forth to the ship,
filling and emptying it until the ship only has a thin bubble of air
left.

The poison of the asteroid spider does not keep well, and hence
is of little value. The webbing can be cut and coated to eliminate
the adhesive qualities. The resulting ropes are very strong, but
also susceptible to flames; they do not ignite and burn on their
own, but melt away under a flame almost instantly.
Spiritjam

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any space
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Special

DIET: Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (15-16)
TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Any evil

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 0

MOVEMENT: Fl 24 (E)

HIT DICE: 10

THACO: 11

NO. OF ATTACKS: Z
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-8/1-8

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Intelligence drain, spells
SPECIAL DEFENSES: +1 edged weapons to hit
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 25%

SIZE: M (5'-6' tall)
MORALE: Champion (16)

XP VALUE: 13,000

A spiritjam is the soul of an evil cleric or wizard who died while
spelljamming. The spirit of the cleric or wizard remained behind
when the physical body perished. The spiritjam in life could have
been a drow, half-elf, or human. It moves easily through space.

A spiritjam appears as a floating, diaphanous form resembling
its former human or demihuman body. A spiritjam can be easily
differentiated from other undead because of its eyes, which spar-
kle like stars, and its hands, which have abnormally long fingers
ending in claws. The hair of a spiritjam appears as a cloud-like
mist that surrounds the undead creature's head.

Combat: Spiritjams envy and hate all life, especially spacefarers.
They pass through the walls of ships to attack those inside. Their
primary targets are a ship's spelljamming wizard or cleric and the
ship's captain. By disabling these people, spiritjams hope to crip-
ple the ship and then feeding on the rest at their leisure.

A spiritjam prefers to move through a ship's walls, remaining
hidden and observing the crew until it has selected its first targets.
Then it comes up behind its target and attacks with its claws. Each
claw hit drains 1d3 points of Intelligence from the victim. When a
victim's Intelligence reaches 0, he dies. Lost Intelligence is re-
gained at a rate of 2 points per day.

Spiritjams prefer to attack physically because of their
Intelligence-draining ability. However, when they are threatened
or outnumbered, they attack with spells to put the odds in their
favor. Spiritjams retain the spellcasting ability they had in life.
The spiritjam has access to the spells its original form had memo-
rized on the day of its death; the spiritjam cannot memorize addi-
tional spells. Spiritjams were usually spellcasters of 7th level or
higher. To randomly determine the spellcasting level, roll 1dé and
add 6.

Spiritjams also possess a gaze weapon, Creatures meeting the
gaze of a spiritjam must roll successful saving throws vs. petrifi-
cation or stand paralyzed with fear for 1d4 rounds. Spiritjams are
immune to petrification and fear spells.

Blunt weapons, even magical ones, cannot harm spiritjams.
Only magical edged weapons can deal them any damage. Further,
their magic resistance makes them terrible foes. They are turned
as special undead. If a dispel evil spell breaches their magic resist-
ance, a spiritjam is driven away for 1d12 hours.

 

Spiritjams can sense life within a 500-mile radius of themselves,
and they can sense someone spelljamming within a 5,000-mile ra-
dius. They can attack in space at anytime, as a spiritjam is undead
and therefore never rests. However, if a spiritjam travels to a
planet, its activity cycle is restricted to the evening. It is further
hampered because it can only attack when stars are visible out-
side. For this reason, most spiritjams restrict their travels to
space.

A few spiritjams seek out enemies their former selves faced in
life,

Habitat/Society: Spiritjams hate all life because they detest their
own undead state. They make their homes on moons or barren
planets near populated worlds. The spiritjams observe these
worlds and the comings and goings of ships. When they have
gathered enough information, they begin their attacks on the
shipping lanes.

The land around the lair of a spiritjam is littered with bits of
ships and the personal possessions of its victims. Once a lair is es-
tablished, the spiritjam is loathe to leave it. Only driving the
spiritjam away or eliminating ship travel to nearby worlds can
cause it to seek another home.

Spiritjams are exceptionally intelligent and understand many
languages. Many of them appreciate the finer things in life, col-
lecting art objects and valuables from their victims.

Frequently a spiritjam’s lair will have from one to three spell-
jamming helms, Usually these helms are damaged. The lairs
sometimes resemble trophy rooms, containing objects from the
ships the spiritjam attacked.

Ecology: The only pleasure spiritjams have is in killing. They are
like a disease, killing without reason or discretion. As they are
undead, they do not eat or gain sustenance, They have no natural
predators.
Survivor

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Phlogiston
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (15-16)
TREASURE: Ww
ALIGNMENT: Neutral good
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 10
MOVEMENT: 0

HIT DICE: 10+
THACO: 20

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Mind control
SPECIAL DEFENSES: None
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 30%

SIZE: MorS
MORALE: Fearless (20)
XP VALUE: 3,000

Survivors are high-level, intelligent humans, demihumans, or hu-
manoids who have been trapped in a state of suspended anima-
tion and drifting in the phlogiston for many years—often
centuries, sometimes even longer. Such extreme exposure to the
exotic vapors of the phlogiston works changes in the minds of the
survivors, making them both more, and less, than human.

When found, a survivor is in the unusual state of suspended an-
imation induced by the phlogiston. Its skin is gray and stony. Its
clothes are at least several decades, if not centuries, out of fash-
ion. Aside from this, it looks just like any other person would af-
ter drifting in the phlogiston for any period of time. The only
remarkable thing about it is that the survivor does not awaken
from its phlogiston-induced coma for more than a few minutes or
hours at a time. Its flesh returns to normal within hours after ex-
posure to air. When conscious, it accepts food and drink (soup,
water, ale, etc.), but it is extremely weak and unable to stand or
speak above a whisper.

Combat: A survivor does not engage in normal melee or magical
combat. Instead, it gradually takes over the minds of crew mem-
bers aboard the spelljamming vessel that had the misfortune to
rescue it. It takes over one crew member every day (24 hours),
starting with the weakest or least intelligent and working its way
up to more powerful and more useful slaves. Humans, demihu-
mans, and humanoids are all targets. The character who is being
attacked this way is allowed a saving throw vs. spells, but be-
cause the process is so gradual (stretching over the full 24-hour
period), there is a —2 penalty to the die roll. A character who
rolls an unmodified 20 saves automatically and also becomes
vaguely aware that something is amiss. Other characters who
save successfully without rolling a 20 may complain of head-
aches, but they blame these on foul air or bad food.

Once a character is controlled, the survivor can make full use
of that character's senses. It can see, hear, taste, smell, and feel
anything the character can. As it acquires more slaves, it can
make use of any or all of their sensory input.

At first, controlled characters don't act any differently than be-
fore, Gradually (within a week), they become sullen and with-
drawn, going about their work with no humor or enthusiasm.
The more slaves the survivor has, the more sullen and withdrawn
they all become.

 

 

 

 

 

Eventually, the survivor tries to seize control of the ship. If it
controls everyone aboard, this is quite easy. If it becomes aware
that someone aboard is getting suspicious and it feels that its
chances are good, or it senses that it may be attacked, it stages a
mutiny, using whatever slaves it has to take the ship by force. Its
slaves still have the full use of all their powers and abilities, and
the survivor uses these as intelligently as possible during a mu-
tiny. (If, for example, the survivor controls the ship's captain and
crew, but it believes that a group of PC passengers is getting sus-
picious, it may simply have the captain try to calm their fears and
explain that this sort of sullen behavior is common toward the
end of a long voyage, thereby buying more time in which to try
enslaving the PCs.)

The effect of the survivor's enslavement can be removed by the
Sth-level priest spell dispel evil, the 3rd-level wizard spell dispel!
magic (the survivor is considered a 10th-level wizard for purposes
of dispelling its control), or a wish or limited wish. Once released
from the survivor's control, a former slave knows that he feels
better, but doesn’t know why.

Habitat/Society: The survivor has no social structure. It is almost
always entirely solitary. More than one may be encountered if the
DM wants to challenge an especially powerful group of PCs, but
this should be reserved for extreme cases. (They may have been a
pair of criminals who were lashed together and thrown over-
board, for example, explaining how they managed to stay to-
gether through the years.)

Once the survivor takes control of a ship, its only goal is to ac-
quire more slaves. The survivor can control a number of slaves
equal to 10 times its Intelligence score. If it reaches a port, it may
have its slaves move it ashore, where it could conceivably enslave
an entire small town. Or, it may continue operating the spell-
jammer, taking on unsuspecting passengers at every port.

Ecology: The survivor's only desire is sensory input, which it has
been starved of for so long, and it will do anything to get it.
Syllix

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any space
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Hive/platoon
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average
TREASURE: D
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil
NO. APPEARING: 2-12
ARMOR CLASS: 7
MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 3+1
THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-8 (Weapon)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Standard
SIZE: M (7' long/ tall)
MORALE: Elite (13)

XP VALUE: 175

The syllix is a highly developed invertebrate, resembling a cross
between a worm and a salamander. The syllix's body is seg-
mented, tapering to a pointed tail and a worm-like head with a
pair of wide, unblinking eyes. It has a long, forked tongue that is
often slipping in and out of its mouth.

Unlike a worm, however, the syllix also has a two pairs of
limbs. These are rubbery, tentacle-like appendages. Each of the
lower limbs ends in a flat pad. The upper limbs end in six smaller
tentacles that, because of their boneless nature, are even more
dexterous than fingers.

A syllix can move by crawling or slithering along the ground,
or by walking upright on its two rear limbs. In the latter mode its
movement is reduced to half that listed above. When crawling,
however, the syllix cannot use a weapon.

Syllix speak their own tongue. Some of them have learned the
common language, but their speech is very sibilant, unpleasant
for most other creatures to listen to. Also, their war-like nature is
well known, so these creatures do not engage in a lot of pleasant
chit-chat with creatures of other races.

Combat: Syllix use a variety of weapons well. They are particu-
larly fond of specially modified light crossbows and short
swords. Syllix attack aggressively and make good use of terrain,
ship features, or anything else that might provide a tactical ad-
vantage.

In normal times, the syllix fight tenaciously, with a morale of
13. However, during the outbreaks of the Eruption (see “Habitat/
Society”), the morale of a band of syllix improves to 15.

Syllix are eager to capture prisoners when they engage in battle
with other races. Often they stage a boarding raid to acquire pris-
oners, then retire to their own vessel and leave.

The fate of the prisoners is not known to creatures of other
races, though it is rumored to be horrible beyond belief, The com-
mon belief is that syllix require enzymes from the living brains of
intelligent creatures in order to breed the mage-stars (see
“Habitat/Society”) that they need for space travel. Prisoners are
kept immobilized, but conscious and alive, for months, often in

 

 

 

 

excruciating pain. During this time, their brains are literally
sucked out of their skulls by a developing mage-star.

In space, the syllix employ vessels with spelljamming helms
powered by the mage-stars. They have been encountered on sev-
eral types of vessels, including squidships, hammerships, and gal-
leons.

Habitat/Society: The syllix develop in a very small area, such as
an asteroid or an island on a planet. They breed and feed until the
population of their land, fleet, or asteroid reaches explosive pro-
portions. Hermaphroditic, each syllix gives birth after it has eaten
enough food. Eventually, the syllix start to give birth to a genera-
tion of blind, white young. These are called the mage-stars.

The mage-stars are syllix in every way, except that they are
blind—and thus do not study nor practice combat—and they
have the innate ability to activate a spelljammer helm. When
these mage-stars reach maturity (after about three years), the syl-
lix suddenly go through the great convulsion their society, and the
rest of the worlds, call the Eruption.

An erupting band of syllix has one mage-starred helm of SR 6,
two of SR 5, three of SR 4, and so on through six of SR 1,

Guided by their mage-stars, the syllix break out of their home-
world and spread across space in an orgy of attacking, looting,
and killing. No prisoners are taken when the syllix are in the
midst of an Eruption. Each individual attacks with a +1 bonus to
all attack rolls. Their morale is increased to the champion level.

Ecology: The syllix is a meat-eating scavenger. It can live in most
climates, but it prefers those that serve as habitat for a lot of po-
tential food. Many an island, asteroid, or small continent has
been ravaged by a growing host of syllix during their breeding
stage.

 
Symbiont

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any non-cold
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Colony
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Magical emanations
INTELLIGENCE: Animal (1)
TREASURE: None
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1-40
ARMOR CLASS: 9
MOVEMENT: i/4

HIT DICE: 1

THACO: —

NO. OF ATTACKS: 0
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 0

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: T (@/a" diam.)
MORALE: Nil

XP VALUE: 175

Power symbionts are the bane of all spelljamming farers. They do
nothing but rob the power from various magical items on the
ship. These creatures have been found on various planets, as
well, This has created a dislike for spelljamming in some areas.

A power symbiont is a creature that looks very much like
swamp fungus. It is dark brown in color, unless it is currently
feeding on magical emanations (during which process it is rust
colored). They breed asexually once they have grown to twice
their standard size of '/4 inch in diameter.

Combat: These creatures reflect spells cast at them back to the
source, with no diminution of strength. This can be an advantage
to a ship infested by power symbionts. If a ship is magically at-
tacked and a symbiont is in the spell effect, the spell is reflected
back to the attacking ship. In a case like this, neither the caster
nor the attacking ship receive any Dexterity or SR bonus to the
saving throws.

Habitat/Society: These creatures do not purposefully create a so-
ciety. They may be found together only where there are sufficient
magical emanations to warrant their numbers. Once the magical
properties of the item have been drained, they abandon it.

Ecology: Power symbionts are attracted to the magical auras that
they sense through wildspace. They are unable to move quickly,
and can only hope that the ship actually scoops them up with its
gravitational pull.

Once on the ship, they begin to move about at a movement rate
of 1/4, in search of magical auras. Once one is found, the symbi-
onts head straight for it. They can sense the auras of magical
items from 20 feet away. If they sense another aura as they travel
toward the first, it is ignored, unless it is a stronger aura. They
continue this way until they find the most appetizing item. They
then attach themselves to the item and begin feeding.

 

 

 

 

 

Once the item has lost all charges (a power symbiont drains one
charge per round; see the list below for figuring the number of
charges in an item), the power symbiont dispatches 1d8 1/4" sym-
bionts to search for another source of magical energy. The rest of
the symbiont dies, hardening in one day to a hard, brown lump.

If the symbionts that have been dispatched from the drained
item cannot find another magical source within one week, they
traverse the gravity plane of the ship and throw themselves back
into wildspace. If they happen to enter the phlogiston, they die
immediately.

The total number of charges in a magical item can be computed
from the following list:

1 charge per plus of a weapon

1 charge per charge of a rod, staff or wand

1 charge for semi-empathy

1 charge per Intelligence point

1 charge per language known

2 charges per Ego point

2 charges per primary ability

2 charges for empathy

3 charges for speech

4 charges for telepathy

6 charges per extraordinary power
10 charges per special purpose
12 charges per special purpose power
Vine, Infinity

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Wildspace
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Single plant
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Air (gases and moisture)
INTELLIGENCE: Non-(0)
TREASURE: See below
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1
ARMOR CLASS: 10
MOVEMENT: See below
HIT DICE: See below
THACO: Nil

NO. OF ATTACKS: Nil
DAMAGE/ATTACK: Nil
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Engulfs
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Regrowth
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 25%

SIZE: Any
MORALE: Nil

XP VALUE: 50

An infinity vine is a leafless, bright green plant with an extremely
rapid rate of growth. It consists of an enormous number of thin,
interwoven stems, all part of the same plant. Numerous bright
blue flowers appear throughout the plant, each only 1/2” across.
These flowers draw nutrients and moisture for the plant directly
from the air itself. The plant thrives so long as it is kept within a
crystal sphere’s wildspace and exposed to both breathable air and
to light of any kind. An infinity vine grows very rapidly, seeming
to create plant material out of thin air.

Combat: The infinity vine poses a special hazard in the wildspace
of many crystal spheres. Bits of this plant are often broken off and
discarded from infested ships, and these dormant bits sometimes
drift into the atmosphere and gravity field of a spelljamming ship.
If a bit of vine falls against an air-bearing ship or other space ob-
ject (including an asteroidal body of less than 100 miles diame-
ter), the vine begins to grow outward at the rate of ten cubic feet
per round. If unchecked, it eventually grows to a depth of ten feet
over every surface until it completely covers the exterior of the
ship or asteroid (but it does not reach into dark spaces.

The gravest danger that an infinity vine poses is that it adds to
the overall tonnage of any spelljamming ship it covers, and it
does so very quickly. When this plant has covered an entire ship,
it will have increased the ship's tonnage to four times its original
value. This has obvious and immediate effects on spelljamming
procedures.

An infinity vine consumes the waste gases given off by air-
breathing creatures, and it gives off large quantities of oxygen
(see “Ecology”). It is harmless to living beings, though it grows
around and buries slow-moving or immobile beings. Victims can
tear through an infinity vine (which regrows behind them as they
pass) at their movement rate in feet per turn, if using bare hands
or sheer force. A being with claws or a short-bladed weapon (dag-
ger or smaller) can move at double this rate, and a being with a
bladed weapon at least as large as a short sword can hack through
the vine at triple this rate.

An infinity vine is destroyed by any amount of direct contact
with flame, and it stops growing (but stays green) if placed under-
water or in total darkness. As burning is not a practical solution
for clearing an infested ship, the spelljamming crew must either
head for the phlogiston to scrape off every bit of dried vine, stop

 

in a planet's shadow out of the sunlight, or land on a large planet,
where after a one-hour delay the infinity vine disappears just as
quickly as it grew (ten cubic feet per round) until it has vanished.

Fire-, acid-, and electricity-based spells destroy all of the infin-
ity vine within their areas of effect, though the vine regrows from
unaffected areas. Cold-based spells cause it to stop growing for
one round per hit point of damage inflicted (but only within the
areas of effect). A darkness spell causes it to stop growing. Haste,
slow, entangle, spike growth, anti-plant shell, plant door, trans-
port via plants, and enlarge/reduce spells have their normal ef-
fects, though a size-altered plant immediately either grows or
shrinks at a proportionately altered rate to fill its original vol-
ume. Magic missile spell damage is regrown almost instantly.
Plant growth spells cause it to grow at a rate of 100 cubic feet per
round (though still limited to ten feet deep over the surface it is
on). Charm plant and hold plant spells can cause the vine to stop
growing within the areas of effect.

The infinity vine is immune to all known plant diseases and to
poisons of any form (including the cloudkill spell). It cannot be
polymorphed, energy drained, or slain by death magic.

Habitat/Society: An infinity vine will not grow at all on planetary
bodies over 100 miles in diameter, regardless of how much light
or air the plant receives. When exposed to phlogiston, the plant
immediately shrivels, becoming dark brown and extremely brit-
tle. It is not dead, however, but merely dormant; if exposed to air
and light in wildspace, the plant revives again, regrowing all
damaged areas after a one-turn delay.

Ecology: Infinity vine, can radically transform small asteroids
into havens for bizarre ecological systems. The vine expands the
air envelope around any object it engulfs so that the envelope is
twice as thick as it formerly was. Castaways and exiles are some-
times found on such worlds, as a steady air and food supply is
provided by the vine. Infinity vine is edible, though unappetiz-
ing.
Wiggle (Hurwaet)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Hurwaet Swamp Wiggle Salt Wiggle

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any/Space Temperate and subtropical / Temperate and subtropical
Swamp, bog, marsh ocean coasts

FREQUENCY: Very rare Very rare Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Tribal/ship Tribal Tribal
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any/Night Night
DIET: Omnivore Omnivore Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12) Average (8-10) Average (8-10)
TREASURE: M,Q D Zz
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Neutral Lawful evil
NO. APPEARING: 1-6 8-15 1-8
ARMOR CLASS: 4 (5) 4 (5) 2
MOVEMENT: 9, Sw 12 9, Sw 18 6, Sw 24
HIT DICE: 3 4+] 12
THACO: 17 17 9
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 2 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-8 (weapon) 2-8 (weapon) /2-7 or 2-7/2-7 1-4/1-4/9-16
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil Nil Rending
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Fog cloud Fog cloud Fog cloud
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil Nil Nil
SIZE: M (6?/2' tall) M (7' tall) L (9" tall)
MORALE: Elite (14) Champion (15) Champion (15)
XP Value: 120 175 2,000

The hurwaeti are an ancient humanoid race distantly related to
both sahuagin and lizard men. In space, they usually function as
mercenaries, common crewmen, or occasionally as pirates, trad-
ers, or salvagers operating their own ships.

Hurwaeti have thick, tough scales; these are very small, hard,
and shiny, so that their dark olive-green hides look smooth and
glossy (many observers mistake this gloss for dampness or slime).
They have long, frog-like legs, webbed fingers and toes, and
gnome-like faces with large ears, pointed noses, and long, sharp
chins. Adult hurwaeti have short, sparse beards and tufts of
coarse hair atop their heads. Venerable adults tend to have long
beards, thicker tufts of hair, and bushy eyebrows. Adults are be-
tween six and seven feet tall and weigh from 190 to 230 pounds. A
hurwaet can live for 300 years.

Hurwaeti favor simple clothing, usually long, brightly colored
loin cloths, and belts and packs for carrying equipment. They de-
test the body paint favored by lizard men, but they like to wear
lots of jewelry. Particular favorites are large earrings made from
ceramics or shells, as well as arm bands and wrist and ankle
bracelets.

Combat: Hurwaeti favor large shields and swords in combat.
They typically arm themselves with slings or javelins for ranged
combat, Although neutral, they have lawful tendencies and usu-
ally can be counted on to follow orders. Their long, powerful legs
make them good jumpers; a fully-equipped hurwaet can leap
eight feet straight up or 20 feet horizontally, making them good
troops for boarding actions. Leaping hurwaeti working with a
squad of swooping hadozee make truly irresistible boarding par-
ties. A shield improves a hurwaet's Armor Class by 1. They can
wear armor if they choose, but armor is ineffective unless it im-
proves their Armor Class to 4 or better. Each adult hurwaet can
cast fog cloud once per day, as a 9th-level caster. If faced with im-
minent defeat, a group of hurwaeti will use their fog cloud ability
to conceal themselves and confuse enemies. They use the conceal-
ment to escape, regroup for a counter attack, or even to board an
enemy ship.

Habitat/Society: The hurwaeti were once a great spacefaring race
that had colonized many systems, spreading art, civilization, mo-
rality, and an philosophy favoring altruism and discipline
throughout the spheres. But an ancient war broke up their empire
and killed the brightest and most energetic individuals. The de-
struction stranded the hurwaeti colonists, leaving them to degen-
erate into the swamp and salt wiggles. The remaining spacefarers
became impoverished wanderers, content to simply earn a living
for themselves and their tribes.

Hurwaeti tribes are made up of clans, each ruled by an elder.
The senior clan head—usually the oldest and wealthiest—
governs the tribe. All disputes within the tribe are settled by ap-
pealing to the tribal chief. When a chief dies, a new chief is chosen
by election from among the clan elders. Young hurwaeti gain
wealth and status by serving on their clan ships or by venturing
forth independently.

Hurwaeti speak their own archaic tongue, which features a dif-
ficult, convoluted syntax and includes hisses and clicks; most hu-
mans and demihumans find the hurwaeti tongue difficult to learn
and even harder to actually speak. Lizard men, not surprisingly,
usually can master it without much difficulty. Hurwaeti also
speak the tongue of lizard men and whatever racial tongue is
common to their tribe's home system, be it human common or a
demihuman racial tongue.

Hurwaeti are generally accommodating and nonaggressive, if a
bit covetous and mercenary. Nobody gets anything from a hur-
waet for free. Nevertheless, hurwaeti share other races’ hatred to-
ward the neogi and are similarly hostile toward eye tyrants and
illithids. This has led some scholars to conclude that the war that
ended the hurwaeti empire probably was fought against all three
races simultaneously. If this is the case (and the hurwaeti aren't
saying), they did well to survive at all. In any event, a hurwaet
will never surrender to a neogi, illithid, or eye tyrant, or to any
ship that might contain members of these races; hurwaeti will do
anything to avoid capture in these cases, though their usual
course to doggedly fight until killed.
Wiggle (Hurwaet)

 

Hurwaeti usually are found as crew on other races’ ships. Their
ability to refresh a ship's atmosphere with the fog cloud ability
makes them valuable members of any ship's crew. Their ability to
follow orders and jump between ships makes them very useful in
combat or other dangerous situations. All adult hurwaeti have
spacefaring and ship-handling skills.

Hurwaeti who don't own ships travel in small groups that con-
sist of individuals of the same sex and about the same age. Such
groups live, eat, and work together. If one member is mistreated
or becomes dissatistied, the whole group protests to their em-
ployer. If greatly disaffected or dissatisfied, the whole group quits
the ship at the first opportunity (their personal sense of honor
keeps them from inciting mutiny).

These groups usually form to earn hard cash for the tribe,
though they are also on the lookout for mates, When two groups
of hurwaeti of opposite sex meet, there is a 35% chance that the
two groups exchange two or more individuals (their employers’
objections notwithstanding). Unless they decide to jump ship be-
cause of poor treatment, the two groups serve out the terms of
their voyages, then quit the ships, ignoring offers of further em-
ployment, preferring instead to return to their tribes with their
new mates. About 5% of hurwaet groups form specifically to
hunt for mates. Such groups stick with their ships though thick
and thin until they find mates, ignoring mistreatment, privation
and hardship to the limits of their endurance. Once they meet a
group of the opposite sex, however, they exchange individuals
60% of the time, and thereafter are not inclined to ignore poor
conditions. There are several tales of taskmaster spelljammer
captains who thought they had found the perfect crew, only to
find themselves short-handed after their hurwaeti crew members
had a night on the town.

Hurwaeti who own their own ships use series helms for motive
power, Hurwaeti build the same sorts of ships as lizard men do,
when they build them at all. Most hurwaet ships are purchased or
salvaged, and most are decrepit-looking craft sporting many al-
terations and repairs. However, hurwaeti are skilled spacers and
their ships’ actual condition reflects this.

Although some (5%) hurwaet ship owners are pirates, these
usually are restricted to neogi, illithid, and eye tyrant space. Hur-
waet pirate ships operating in such space always have six series
helms. Most hurwaet ships patrol wildspace looking for wrecks
to salvage. They are particularly fond of haunting asteroid fields
infested with murderoids. The hurwaeti gingerly pluck wreckage
off the monsters’ surfaces, often by trailing lines just long enough
for the crew to leap to safety should a hungry mouth suddenly ap-
pear. Most hurwaet ships operating in dangerous space do not
hesitate to offer assistance to any other non-hostile ships—tfor a
price, A few hurwaet tribes operate ships that pick up varied car-
goes of any commodity that can be sold at a profit. Some of these
cargoes are converted to finished goods right aboard the ships,
the most common of these being textiles, paints, dyes, and jew-
elry.

Most hurwaet ships carry the standard crew for the ship type,
1d6 heavily armed hurwaet warriors (plate mail, two-handed
swords, and long bows), and one or two lizard man, human, or
demihuman spellcasters (clerics or mages of 2nd to 5th level) for
defense.

Ecology: Hurwaeti prefer to eat fresh or preserved seafood, but
they are omnivores, capable of eating anything humans can, plus
a few things humans would find unwholesome.

Like their distant cousins, the lizard men and the sahuagin,
hurwaeti reproduce by laying eggs. However, the male hurwaet
SCOOps

up the eggs as soon as they are laid and places them inside a spe-
cial pouch in his abdomen, where the eggs incubate for about
eight months before hatching. This habit usually makes it diffi-
cult for non-hurwaeti to tell the males from the females.

Swamp Wiggles

These degenerate hurwaeti live a barbaric existence as tribal
hunters or occasionally brigands. In combat they use large
wooden or hide shields and large clubs, They also can deliver vi-
cious kicks with their long legs. Swamp wiggles are dexterous
enough to make such combination attacks without penalty.
While underwater, where their clubs are useless, swamp wiggles
attack with two kicks. Swamp wiggles also employ simple missile
weapons, such as slings, javelins, and darts (1/a chance for each).

Swamp wiggle communities usually do produce a few artifacts,
such as jewelry, pottery, nets, and baskets. If approached from a
position of strength, they can be persuaded to trade these items,
along with natural products, such as game and fish, for tools,
glass beads, and other manufactured goods.

Swamp wiggles are excellent swimmers and have no difficulty
squirming through mud, weeds, quicksand, and other watery
hazards. This ability tends to make swamp wiggle ambushes very
deadly to creatures accustomed to dry land.

Swamp wiggles reproduce the same way hurwaeti do. About
2% of all young swamp wiggles are born as larger, more aggres-
sive salt wiggles. These evil, voracious offspring usually devour
their siblings and often kill the incubating male. Once they
emerge from the male's body, they scurry away to a solitary life.

Salt Wiggles

This largest and most degenerate of the hurwaeti subraces has
many traits in common with the sahuagin: aggressiveness, greed,
and evil cunning being chief among these.

A salt wiggle is a huge creature with a toothy, gaping maw and
powerful limbs. They often are mistaken for scrags, and they are
every bit as formidable, though they do not regenerate. Salt wig-
gles employ no weapons, attacking with their teeth and claws. IF
both claws hit an opponent, a salt wiggle automatically rends for
an additional 1d4+4 points of damage.

Salt wiggles live a primitive, savage existence. They produce
no goods of their own, preferring combat to trading; they do,
however, enter into alliances with sahuagin, ixitxachitl], krakens,
and other evil sea creatures for pay or shared profit. They tend to
keep their bargains, but they are opportunistic and ally them-
selves with the local faction that seems most powerful. Salt wig-
gles also have been known to ally themselves with pirates or
coastal humans.

Salt wiggles do not incubate their eggs inside their bodies; in-
stead they hide them in weedy shallows where the sun can warm
them. Salt wiggle tribes do not abandon their eggs, however, and
assign one or more tribe members (not necessarily the parents) to
guard them until they hatch. Once the young emerge, the guards
act as nannies and teachers to the youngsters. Salt wiggles born to
swamp wiggles are immediately outcast, if not killed outright. If
these creatures cannot get to salt water before reaching adult-
hood, they haunt rivers or lakes where there is a steady supply of
victims. Many make their homes under lonely bridges, where
they extort tribute from passersby. Such creatures are often
known locally as bridge trolls,
Wizshade

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any

FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Phlogiston and magic
INTELLIGENCE: Supra-genius (19-20)
TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral

 

NO. APPEARING:
ARMOR CLASS:

1 (occasionally 1d4)
0

 

 

MOVEMENT: 12, Fl 24 (C)
HIT DICE: 10

THACO: Nil

NO. OF ATTACKS: 0
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 0

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Random magic
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 25%

SIZE: M (5’ tall)
MORALE: Champion (15)
XP VALUE: 13,000

When a wizshade appears, first a swirling vortex of many colors
about eight feet in diameter is seen. Out of this vortex rises a typi-
cal fantasy wizard (long beard, conical hat with tassels, flowing
robe, etc.). However, the wizard and all of his clothes are the
same (usually bright) color. The end of the robe seems to swirl
into the vortex and become one with it. Wizshades can step out of
their vortex and move around on foot, though this is rarely done.
The movement rates are for the wizshade only, while the vortex is
left behind.

A wizshade's vortex is connected via a nearly imperceptible
umbilical cord that reaches into the phlogiston (if the encounter is
in the phlogiston, then it opens to another area of the phlogiston).
It can be closed or opened by the wizshade at will, but it remains
in the same location. Thus a wizshade that leaves its vortex can be
captured (which is why they seldom do so). Anyone stepping into
this vortex is sucked into it and appears somewhere in the phlo-
giston,

Striking a wizshade causes one to conclude that they are non-
corporeal, as the weapon passes right through with little resist-
ance. They are actually composed of stuff very similar to the
phlogiston.

Half of all wizshades encountered are neutral to friendly and
may cast spells to aid those encountered. Others are neutral to
hostile and cast spells to harm those encountered.

Combat: Wizshades cannot attack physically. However, they
have a powerful but chaotic mastery of wizard spells. Each round
of combat, roll 1d10, The result is the level of wizard spell the
wizshade can cast. If a 10 is rolled, then the DM can select the
level. Once the level is determined, roll 1d100, This is the random
spell the wizshade casts. If the result is higher than the number of
spells at that level, then the DM can select the spell. No matter
what spell is acquired, the wizshade must cast it. All spells are in-
stantaneous and only the final somatic gestures of the spell are re-
quired.

A wizshade can be harmed only by magic or magical items.
Any spell or magical attack successfully cast on a wizshade elimi-
nates the equivalent spell level from the wizshade for that com-
bat. Thus, if a cloudkill spell were successfully cast at the
wizshade, then it could not cast Sth-level spells for the rest of that
combat. However, no damage results from such magic. If this

 

level of spell were rolled later in a combat round, the wizshade
could not cast a spell that round. A wizshade must check morale
upon each loss of a spell level. Failure means that it vanishes back
into its vortex.

If a wizshade’s magic resistance succeeds, it means that it has
captured the energy of the spell that was cast at it. Roll 1d10 and if
the result is a spell level that was been closed to the wizshade,
then it is now available again.

The only way to cause damage to a wizshade is to physically at-
tack it with magical weapons. These weapons only cause damage
(all weapon and strength bonuses apply)—no special results, such
as a vorpal or life stealing effect, will function.

Habitat/Society; Wizshades have a distinct ranking amongst
themselves based on their color, The ranks proceed as the colors
of the rainbow (violet, indigo, blue, green, yellow, orange, and
red, in order of increasing rank). Status does not seem to affect
any of the abilities of wizshades.

None know where wizshades come from. Space sages theorize
that they are the coalescence of the phlogiston’s conscience. Cer-
tainly, they are found in the phlogiston more frequently than else-
where. However, they can be encountered anywhere, even inside
the crystal spheres. Their vortices have occasionally been used to
enter the phlogiston from within the crystal spheres.

Ecology: Wizshades never carry anything tangible. Even their
robes, slippers, and conical hats are made of the same noncorpo-
real material as their bodies, Furthermore, when they are slain
they vanish into their vortices, which then close. Thus no item of
value has ever been gained from slaying a wizshade.

Wizshades absorb phlogiston to heal their wounds (they do not
heal otherwise). The only other thing they come close to “eating”
is magic, which they have a 25% chance of absorbing. They have
no natural enemies or allies.
Wryback

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any

 

 

 

 

 

FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Pack
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night
DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: O,P.Q
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 2-7
ARMOR CLASS: 5
MOVEMENT: 15

HIT DICE: 3
THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-3/1-3
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below

 

SIZE: S (3° tall)
MORALE: Average (10)
XP VALUE: 175

Wrybacks are malicious little humanoid creatures that live by
scavenging and stealing. They are named for their twisted, rub-
bery bodies and limbs.

Adult wrybacks are three feet tall and weigh about 50 pounds.
Their skin is black or gray, sometimes with a blue or green tint.
Their heads are squat and wide, with two bulging, cat-like eyes
(either oily blue or sickly green), rudimentary noses with vertical
nostril slits, and wide mouths filled with curved, needle-sharp
teeth. Their arms are ape-like and oddly twisted. Their hands
have three fingers and a thumb, and each digit is equipped with a
curved, wickedly sharp, ivory claw. The legs also are short,
twisted and ape-like. The feet are prehensile, having four fingers
and a thumb, but with flat nails instead of claws.

Although wrybacks can manipulate objects with all four ap-
pendages, the feet usually are used for delicate tasks. Thick,
rough pads on the feet and palms of the hands allow them to
move almost silently (90% ) and climb sheer surfaces of stone (un-
less completely smooth) and of wood or any other surface soft
enough for the creatures to sink their claws into, Wrybacks have
been seen walking on two legs, running on all fours, and even
swinging from rafters or spelljammer deck beams.

Combat: Wrybacks fight with their claws, but they prefer stealth
and backbiting to direct attack. Wrybacks can move very quietly
and are masters of concealment; opponents suffer a —3 penalty
to surprise rolls. Wrybacks are 50% undetectable even if listened
or watched for. Wrybacks have only weak infravision (30-foot
range), but their eyes are five times more sensitive to normal light
than human eyes. This causes their eyes to glow an eerie blue in
dim light. Wrybacks also have hearing even more acute than that
of elves. This and their sharp eyes give them a bonus of +1 to
their surprise rolls.

Wrybacks have no true bones, only thin rods of gristle sur-
rounded by layers of smooth, tough muscle—this gives them
their twisted appearance. This construction makes them resistant
to falling damage (subtract 30 feet from the actual distance fallen
when calculating damage) and almost immune to blunt weapons.
Though they feel pain when struck by a bludgeoning weapon,
their bodies tend to compress under the blow, negating damage.
However, a hit with a blunt weapon can inflict 1 point of damage
if the attacker rolls a successful bend bars/lift gates roll.

 

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Wrybacks usually are found in groups, as any
place capable of supporting one of the little pests usually can sup-
port at least three or four. They can be found infesting the holds
of ships or spelljammers (where they stow away by hiding in the
cargo or climbing aboard via mooring lines), granaries, ware-
houses, dungeons, ruins, sewers, and anywhere else that might
attract vermin.

Ecology: The wrybacks’ home system is unknown, but their habit
of stowing away on spelljammers has enabled them to spread to
almost every system that supports life.

Wrybacks are effective, but not subtle, thieves. Their claws
and arms are well suited to grasping and prying. A lone wryback
working on a door or closure for ten minutes effectively has a
Strength of 16 when determining its chance to open it, provided it
is not entirely made out of stone, metal, or other material that is
impervious to its claws. Each additional wryback adds 2 points of
Strength, to a maximum of 19,

Wrybacks have one adaptation to space—the ability to auto-
matically feign death when exposed to deadly air or poison gas.
Wrybacks using this ability consume no air at all; they can main-
tain their trance indefinitely. When exposed to breathable air,
they automatically return to consciousness in 1d4 + 1 rounds.
They also have a 30% chance to voluntarily feign death when at-
tacked and facing death, reawakening in 1d3 hours. An active
wryback counts as half a person when calculating air consump-
tion aboard a spelljammer.

How wrybacks mate is unknown, but they reproduce by bud-
ding. A pregnant female carries 1d4+1 warts on her back for
about 10 weeks, when they erupt into tiny, fully formed wry-
backs (1d3 hp each), these reach maturity in about eight weeks.
Wrybacks live 25-30 years.
Pa

Zard

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any

 

 

 

 

FREQUENCY: Uncommon in wildspace; rare in
phlogiston
ORGANIZATION: Swarm
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Animal (1)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Nil
NO. APPEARING: 10-100
ARMOR CLASS: 8
MOVEMENT: 2, Fl 18 (C)
HIT DICE: L+i
THACO: 19
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

 

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-2
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: __ Nil

 

SIZE: S (11/2' long)
MORALE: Unsteady (5-7)
XP VALUE: 65

Zards are reptiles, averaging one to two feet in length. They have
eight legs, with a set of tiny, grasping claws at the end of each.
These claws, like a zard’s teeth, are very sharp, A thin but tough
webbing runs between the creature's legs, forming a wing-like
glider on each side of its body. Zards use these wings to coast
through space, moving from meal to meal with little effort,
though their maneuverability is quite good.

Zards rarely travel alone. Instead, they float through space,
latched onto other zards with one or more of their clawed legs.
Together, this swarm of up to 100 creatures seeks out food. Indi-
vidual zards range in color from deep forest green to light blue,
though some have been captured that are mottled and even
striped, though always in the blue-green color range.

For all practical purposes, zards are blind. Over the centuries,
their eyes have atrophied from lack of use in the vastness of wild-
space and the phlogiston. In wildspace, zards rely on a sort of so-
nar to locate their meals. They emit a high-pitched, far-reaching
squeal. When this noise echoes back to them after bouncing off an
object, the zard swarm heads for the object, whatever it may be.
Obviously, this dangerous, random feeding method helps to keep
the zard population down in many areas.

Combat: Zards are not consciously malicious creatures, as their
low Intelligence would indicate. However, attacks by zard
swarms have often been cited as the malicious acts of various
gods in a number of different systems. This is more a testament to
the zards’ potential destructive power than the creativity of any
deity.

After a zard swarm has located an object, it follows the object
until it impact. At that time, the swarm breaks up and the zards
cling to whatever they hit. They then begin to devour everything
and anything they can sink their sharp, little teeth into. They
cause 1-2 points of damage with each bite. Though their claws are
sharp, they are not large enough to do any real damage. Zards are
slow-moving once they've landed, making them easy targets.
However, as they are air-breathers, they do put an additional
burden on a ship's air pocket, Every five zards use up the same
amount of air as one human,

Habitat/Society: Wildspace holds the greatest number of zards.

 

 

 

 

 

 

Since zards breathe air, they tend to be found closer to planets,
where they can get fresher air more often. They also pilfer air
from ships or objects they attack. In wildspace, the swarm moves
by creating a rippling, wave-like motion that propels it along,
similar to a dolphin undulating through water.

Zards have also been found in the phlogiston, though they are
much rarer in those environs. In the phlogiston, their wings carry
them through the radiant rivers. Like other air-breathing crea-
tures, however, their flesh turns stone-like once their air pocket is
expended. They float, petrified in their swarm structure, until
they run into a ship or other object maintaining an air supply. The
zards instantly revive and begin their feeding frenzy.

Zard society is relatively peaceful at most times. When food is
plentiful, the swarm simply drifts through its days, coupling and
birthing new zards on the wing. Newborn zards are hungry from
the moment they are born, and they are fully equipped to eat
solid foot. Zards eat anything they can chew, including wood,
rope, paper, flesh, and bone. Even thin sheets of metal aren't ex-
cluded from a zard’s menu.

After a few weeks of short food supply, zards have been known
to prey upon each other. Whole swarms have torn themselves
apart this way. This is a rare occurrence, but it does help to keep
the zard population down.

Ecology: Many creatures, including all types of scavvers, prize
zard meat and actively hunt swarms. This is a dangerous meal to
seek, however, and many creatures have found themselves de-
voured by a zard swarm they were hunting.

Intelligent races, such as the giff and various types of behold-
ers, also find zard meat quite tasty. It shouldn't be surprising,
then, that a thriving trade exists in zard meat in many systems
with spelljamming capability. Zards are also prized for their teeth
and claws, which make excellent points for writing utensils. It is
rumored the neogi use the voracious, razor-toothed little reptiles
in their interrogation of prisoners.
Zodar

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any

 

 

 

 

 

FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Constant

DIET: None
INTELLIGENCE: Unknown
TREASURE: See below
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral (G)
NO, APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: -B

MOVEMENT: 24 (see below)

HIT DICE: 16+

THACO: 5

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-40/2-40 or weapon + 14 (x2)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Invulnerability
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 100%

 

SIZE: M (6’ tall)
MORALE: Special
XP VALUE: 22,000

Zodar are an incredibly powerful race of bipeds. They are all
identical, standing exactly six feet tall. Zodar resemble smooth,
deep-black suits of obsidian plate armor. This is actually their
exoskeleton, which is comprised of material that seems very simi-
lar to the crystal shells. They have no facial features except for
two small slits, which sages believe are their sensory organs.

Zodar can cause speech to issue from the air about them thrice
in a lifetime. Thus they select these times with great care. When a
zodar speaks, it uses its words as sparingly as possible. The lan-
guage used is one that all it wishes to communicate with can un-
derstand (if this is impossible, different listeners hear the speech
in different languages). No hint of pain, fear, joy, or any other
emotion has been issued from a zodar.

The entire internal areas of zodar are comprised of muscle fi-
bers, thus accounting for their incredible 25 Strength. They weigh
nearly 500 Ibs, Though they rarely demonstrate this, zodar can
perform great feats of strength, speed, and endurance. They have
been seen leaping as far as 50 feet upward, moving at 48, and lift-
ing things that even a titan would shudder at.

Combat: Zodar attack with their two arms. They rarely punch
opponents, but rather grasp them and crush their bodies.

Occasionally a zodar is seen found wielding one or two weap-
ons. These are almost always melee weapons. They suffer no pen-
alty when attacking with two weapons,

Zodar are impervious to magic (even that which is cast to aid
them). Furthermore, only physical blows cause them any obvious
harm. Fire, temperature, acid, poison, submersion in water, etc.,
all have no effect upon them, Zodar do not defend themselves in
combat except by attacking back. Their great Armor Class is due
to their strange exoskeleton and may be assisted by their unusual
relationship with magic.

Three times in a lifetime, a zodar can cause any one spell to oc-
cur as if cast by it. Once in a lifetime, a zodar can cause a power-
ful wish to occur. However, the result of this power is almost
always something that is not widely known and does not draw at-
tention to this secretive race.

Habitat/Society: Zodar can be found literally anywhere, though
they avoid large crowds or other situations in which they would
draw a lot of attention. They are most frequently found near the
crystal shells and many space sages have postulated that they are

 

 

 

 

 

somehow tied to the protection and maintenance of these shells.
The reigar claim to have created them as a whim, but then the
reigar claim a lot of things.

They never work side by side or directly against another of
their kind. There is no known ranking among their members.
Further, no zodar of fewer than 16 Hit Dice has ever been encoun-
tered, though tougher ones are not uncommon. The only effect
that additional Hit Dice have upon a zodar is to increase its possi-
ble hit points and XP value.

Zodar deal with all lesser races in a very aloof manner. Even if
they join an adventuring party, they often walk at the back of the
group and do nothing else, not even fight. More than one party
has died while their zodar stood by like a mysterious black statue
witnessing their end. When a zodar does perform some significant
action, it is almost always surprising to those around it. A zodar
may suddenly enter a fray, march toward a single victim, destroy
him, and then freeze in place once the task is completed. A ship
may be nearly destroyed when a zodar acts, hefting the main
mast and hurling it at the enemy like a great lance.

Space sages have theorized that each zodar has a specific mis-
sion that somehow relates to the crystal spheres. It relentlessly
pursues this mission, concerning itself only with things related to
the mission's success. Thus, joining a party may be for the sake of
passage to another place. Perhaps the party's quest somehow fur-
thers its own mission, and it is along to aid them in times of great
peril, For these reasons, it is mot uncommon for zodar to be found
with spacefaring beings, even very insignificant ones!

The only thing a zodar ever carries for any length of time are
weapons, Even then, only two at most are found upon a zodar.
These weapons are 50% likely to be magical. Magical weapons
are 50% likely to be from the special weapons table.

Ecology: Zodar have no natural enemies nor do they prey upon
anything. The exoskeleton of a zodar would make incredible ar-
mor. However, when enough damage is inflicted to kill a zodar,
all that is left of its exoskeleton is a bunch of fragments.
MC7-2109

 
 
2)
o
at
bs
~~
©
=

 
MC7-2109

 
 

hci aa

Ne Compendium

 

Thought you'd seen it all when you met
the neogi? Threw up your hands in
horror at the sight of space barnacles?
> Well. . . get ready for the giant space
hamsters, the symbionts, and lots of
other wild and weird SPELLJAMMER™
»Ccampaign monsters!
In this product are some of the most
fantastic creatures ever seen (or not
seen, as the case may be), in wildspace or out of it. Yes, Virginia,
there really are giant space hamsters lurking in these pages, as
well as whole new races ready for the DM to launch into a
SPELLIAMMER campaign. Once again, there are 64 pages of new
beasties for your playing enjoyment, 5-hole punched and ready
for insertion in your Monstrous Compendium binder. Plus, the
great full-color divider pages with identification tabs make it easier
to organize your critters.
SPELLI|AMMER campaigns will never be the same again. . .

She ae " seers d

POB 756 AOR Sage tem Oa ea el cele

ema ea Cambridge CB1 3LB

WI 53147 U.S.A. ae United Kingdom
PRODUCTS OF YOUR IMAGINATION

ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AD&D, SPELLIAMMER, PRODUCTS OF YOUR IMAGINATION, and
ee Rts cme ee meee CM eC ese

$9.95 US ISBN 0-88038-87 1-4

 
