 
Dee ae,

VE Tite

t fon rae ; ia
: ee RE ee ape

 

Appendix

TSR, Inc. TSR, Ltd.
POB 756 120 Church End, Cherry Hinton
Cambridge CB1 3LB

United Kingdom

Lake Geneva
WI 53147

 
Table of Contents

Alaghi occ cece eee ee 3
Alguduir .... 0... e cece cece cece eee 4
AVIAN 1... ce cece cece cece cence eee 5
Bat, Deep ...... eee cece cece ete eee eee es 7
Beguiler 2.0.0... cece eee eee eee eee 8
Cantobele ...... 0... cece ec ec eee eee eee 9
OF 10
Chitine .. 0... 0. ee eee eee ee eee te 12
Cildabrin ...00. 0. eee eee eee 13
Dimensional Warper ..............000005 14
Dragon, Deep .--.--- ++. eee eee eee renee 15
Elf, Aquatic ....... eee cece eee 17
Fachan ...... 0... ce cee cee cee cee cece eeee 19
Feyr eel e ccc ccc ence ence ene ena te 20
Firetail «0... cc ce ce ec ce een ees 21
Frost... 0. ee ec eee cee cee cence eee e ea te 22
Gaund ..... 0... eee ccc cence te 23
Giant, Mountain ......... cee eee eee eee eee 24
Gloomwing .......... 0. eee eee eee eee te 25
Golden Ammonite .......-.-cceceeeecees 27
Golem, Lightning .......--....eeeeee eee 28
Hamadryad ............. eee cece eee 29
Harrier ..... 0... eee cee cee eee te 30
Harrla ... 0. cece eee et 31
Haun 33

Haundar...... cee cece cc ccc ccc ce eeeee 34

Hendar ....... ccc cece cc cece cence eens 35
Inquisitor ..... 2.0.0... eee eee 36
Lhiannan Shee ............. 0.02.00 ee ee 37
|) 0 39
Manni... 0... ee neo wenees 40
Mara.. 0... 0. ccc ccc cee eee ee te Al
Morin 2.0... cece cc cece e ence ts 42
Naga,Dark ........... 00. cee oe 43
OLPSU Lo. cece ct ene ee 44
Peryton ...... eee eee eee eens 45
Phantom ........ 0.0... cee cee cece ee ee 46
Plant, Carnivorous ...........c0ce eee eee 47
RiNnQwoOrm .... eee eee eee eee eee eee ee 50
Rohch 1... 0... cc cece cece cee cece ene te 51
Sandcat ....... 0. eee eee eee cence te 52
Saurial ..... 00. eee eee eee eee 53
GhaaZ 1... ccc cece cc ec e cece ee ee ec eceee ae 55
Silverdog 2.0... . cece eee ccc ee oe 56
Simpathetic ......... 6. cece cece 57
SkuZ oo cc cece cece cee eee n ee 8 59
Spider, Monkey ...........0.ece eee eeee 60
Tempest .. 00... cece cece cece eee eens 61
Tlincalli 0... cee ee 63
TYEN occ ccc eee cece eee e tence eens 64

Design: David “Zeb” Cook (coordinator),TimBeach,Tim Brown,
William W. ConnorsDale Donovan, Ed Greenwood, Jeff Grubb, Bruce
Heard, Slade Henson, Rob King, Colin McComb, Roger E. Moore,
Bruce Nesmith, Jon Pickens, Jean Rabe, Dori Watry, Skip Williams, and
probably a few other fine people we've forgotten .. .

Editing: Anne McCready, Karen 5S. Boomgarden (coordinator)

Interior [lustrations: Tom Baxa, Valerie Valusek, Mark Nelson

Cover Illustrations: Jeff Easley
Typography: Angelika Lokotz

Production: Dee Barnett

Thanks to everyone who helped in the review process. Without you,
this product would not have been possible.

 

This material is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America. Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the
material or artwork contained herein is prohibited without the express written permission of TSR, Inc.

Random House and its affiliate companies have worldwide distribution rights in the book trade for English language products of TSR,

Inc.

Distributed to the book and hobby trade in the United Kingdom by TSR Ltd.

Distributed to the toy and hobby trade by regional distributors.

ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AD&D, and FORGOTTEN REALMS are registered trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. The

TSR logo is a trademark owned by TSR, Inc.

Copyright ©1991 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Printed in U.S.A.

1-56076-111-3
2125XXX1501
Alaghi

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate/mountainous forests

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Family groups

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)

TREASURE: I (no coins), Q

ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 2-5

ARMOR CLASS: 4

MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 9

THACO: 11

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-12/2-12 or by weapon type
(+5 Strength bonus)

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Missile weapons

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Stealth

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil
SIZE: L (6’ tall with large girth)

 

MORALE: Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE:

Adult: 2,000

Young: 120

Elder: 5,000

Hermit: 6,000

Alaghi are forest-dwelling humanoids distantly related to yeti.
They are barrel-chested, with short, almost invisible necks, and
wide, flat heads with sloping brows. Their shoulders are broad,
and their arms are long and powerful. Their legs are short but
thick, and their hands and feet are very large. An alaghi’s entire
body is covered with thick hair, usually blond, reddish brown, or
charcoal gray. Most blond individuals have green eyes and fur
tinged with green highlights. Adult alaghi stand about six feet tall
and weigh about 330 pounds. They usually live for 75-85 years.

Combat: Alaghi tend to be shy and peaceful and kill only for
food. They can move silently 80% of the time and can hide in
natural surroundings 75% of the time. They are capable war-
riors, however, and fight with great cunning if attacked or pan-
icked. An alaghi’s huge, muscular fists can inflict 2d6 points of
damage in combat. A typical alaghi hunter or warrior carries a
stone knife or hand axe, and three or four wooden javelins that
the creature can hurl with great force. An alaghi can attack with
a weapon in one hand and make a second attack with its empty
fist. If forced into combat, a group of alaghi scatters and hides.
Thereafter, the individuals come out of hiding one at a time to
hurl missiles or melee while their fellows circle to the rear, mov-
ing silently.

Habitat/Society: Most alaghi are semi-nomadic hunter-gatherers
who travel as small families. They are usually encountered on the
move (80%), but when encountered in an encampment (19%), a
group of alaghi has 0-3 (1d4 - 1) youngsters with three Hit Dice
and the same chance to hide and move silently as the adults.
Their combat ability, however, is limited to normal pummeling
or wrestling attacks (1d6/1d6 points of damage). Very rarely
(15% of encamped groups), 15-20 alaghi lay permanent claim to
a particularly bountiful area and settle down to live in crude huts
or large cave complexes. Such communities are always led by an
elder more than 100 years old who has 10 Hit Dice, high Intelli-

 

 

 

 

 

gence, and the ability to cast priest spells. These spells are five
first-level, five second-level, and two third-level spells each day
from the spheres of all, plant, animal, healing, charm, divina-
tion, and combat.

Such communities are generally feared and mistrusted, for the
individuals in them begin to show traits common to their rela-
tives, the yeti. Although willing to trade pelts, game, and ores for
manufactured goods, sedentary alaghi do not hesitate to slay and
eat unwary traders or travelers in their midst.

Even more rare are the hermitic alaghi (1%). These hermits are
adults at least 50 years old, with exceptional Intelligence and neu-
tral good alignment. They are solitary vegetarians and philoso-
phers with 11 Hit Dice and all the powers of an 11th-level druid.
Though shy, they are curious and helpful, and they love riddles
and games of strategy, such as chess, which they play mentally. A
human or demihuman who can beat an alaghi hermit at chess is
rare indeed.

All alaghi speak their own language of hisses, hoots, and
grunts. Sedentary alaghi also speak Common and usually the
language of any neutral or evil creatures living nearby. Alaghi
hermits are loquacious if befriended and can speak with any
woodland creature or animal and 2d4 other languages as well.

Ecology: Nomadic alaghi travel throughout most of the year, go-
ing wherever the game and wild plants provide the best living. In
places where the winters are cold, these alaghi winter in natural
caves or protected valleys. Nomadic alaghi do not necessarily
live in harmony with nature, but they respect it and know how to
use it without destroying it. Sedentary alaghi live much like
primitive humans, but they tend to be greedy and are quite capa-
ble of depleting the resources around them to the point which
their communities must resort to raiding to survive. Hermitic
alaghi live in complete harmony with nature and are always on
good terms with their woodland neighbors.
Alguduir

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Adult Young
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Marshes Marshes
FREQUENCY: Rare Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary Family
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day Day
DIET: Carnivore Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low to average Low (5-7)
(5-10)

TREASURE: Nil Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1-2 1-2
ARMOR CLASS: 6 8
MOVEMENT: 6/21(B)/14 4/16/12
HIT DICE: 4+4 1+1
THACO: 17 20
NO. OF ATTACKS: 5 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK:

Bill: 1-6 1-4

Front claws: 2-5/2-5 1-2/1-2

Rear claws: 2-4/2-4 NA
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil Nil
SPECIAL DEFENSES: — Spell reflection Spell reflection
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 40% 40%
SIZE: M (7' long) S (1'-4' long)
MORALE: Elite (13-14) Unreli. (2-4)
XP VALUE: 975 420

An alguduir’s body is fat but sleek, covered with tough, durable
oil-glistening scales. Its front feet have five black talons each; its
rear feet have only four talons each. Its wings are usually a mot-
tled white, brown, and gray. Its head and body are gray or green-
gray, and are readily camouflaged by marsh plants. Its eyes are
yellow or green. Its gills are located in the throat area behind and
beneath the bill.

Its feathered eagle-like wings are oily and can shed water rap-
idly. This allows the alguduir to swim to the surface, shake its
wings out to full span, and fly away without pause. This oil is not
flammable and an alguduir suffers no extra damage from fire-
based attacks. Its nickname comes from its scaled body that erro-
neously makes people believe it to be related to dragons.

A capable swimmer, the alguduir can breathe underwater and
dive with force and accuracy from the air to an underground tar-
get, gaining a +2 attack bonus. Alguduir snarl, grunt, or shriek,
showing the full scope of emotion, but when hunting they are
eerily silent.

Coxnbat: A repeated marsh-bird call may be an alguduir signal-
ling its position to its mate. This allows the two alguduirs to posi-
tion an enemy in between the two. When this occurs, one
attacks, driving the opponent to the other, opening the victim to
flank and back attacks. They cannot speak, although they may
understand a word or two, or even complete phrases of any lan-
guage spoken by intelligent creatures within their hunting
ground.

Alguduirs often battle creatures underwater. They commonly
capture these aquatic animals in their rear claws, lifting them out
of the water to suffocate them. They also like to drag down avian
or surface-dwelling creatures and hold them underwater for sev-
eral turns until the prey drowns. They employ their rear claws
only when clinging to, or when wrapped around an opponent.
Young alguduirs do not attack with their rear talons, since their
decreased size makes the talons’ usefulness in capturing prey min-
imal at best.

They possess a curious and effective ability to reflect or turn

 

 

 

 

 

spells back at the caster. This natural phenomenon is presently
inexplicable. The spell reflection is an unconscious act, and the
alguduir cannot willfully negate the reflection deliberately, nor
can it willfully exercise it. Even the carcasses of dead alguduir
retain the ability for 4-16 turns.

When a spell is cast upon an alguduir, there is a 65% chance (-
2% per level of the caster above 10th level, and -5 % per level of
the spell above level six) that it wholly reflects back upon the caster
with full effects, and saving throws are applicable. If the caster is
completely protected against such an occurrence, the spell reflects
upon a randomly chosen unprotected creature within 10 feet of the
caster. If unprotected prey is not within range, the reflected spell
dissipates. Besides this powerful spell reflection ability, all spells
cast at an alguduir have a 40% chance of not working at all be-
cause of its magic resistance. The creature’s magical resistance
should be determined only after the spell reflection fails.

Habital/Seciety: Alguduir lair in the tangled, weedy clumps of
solid ground found at the heart of their large marsh. They protect
these small locations with their lives. At any sign of danger, the
young go to the ground there while the parents stalk the in-
truders. If the adults are faced with trespassers that are too strong
to defeat, the adults lead them from the nest, flying or diving to
escape when the danger no longer threatens the lair. If the algu-
duirs deem the trespassers edible and easily killed, they hunt or
attempt to ambush the prey, feeding the victims to their young.
They always deposit the remains far from the lair to avoid calling
attention to their safe haven.

Ecology: The alguduir, sometimes called the swamp dragon, is a
rare carnivore that inhabits only large freshwater or saltwater
marshes, where it feeds on fish, snakes, frogs, mussels that it
smashes open on rocks, and other aquatic life. The alguduir even
feasts upon the giant varieties if they are available. It usually
hunts by flying low over the marsh plants. With its claws and bill
it stabs at creatures in the reeds and boggy ground in the marsh
and nearby areas.
Avian

IRR oF a}

CALINS |

Ns

ae

 

 

 

 

Flightless Boobrie Eblis
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Subtropical/ Plains Subtropical/Swamps Subtropical/Swamps
FREQUENCY: Common Rare Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Flock Solitary Flock
DIET: Herbivore Carnivore Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Animal (1) Animal (1) Low to exceptional (5-16)
TREASURE: Nil Nil Nil (U)
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Neutral Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: 2-20 1-2 4-16
ARMOR CLASS: 7 5 3
MOVEMENT: 18 15, Fl 15 (D) 12, FL 12 (C)
HIT DICE: 1to3 9 4+4
THACO: 1-2 HD: 19 11 15
3 HD: 17
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 3 4
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1 HD: 1-4 1-6 (x2)/2-16 1-4
2 HD: 1-6
3 HD: 1-8
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil Surprise See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil Immune to poison See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil Nil Nil
SIZE: S to L (2' to 8’ tall) L (12’ tall) L (8’ tall)
MORALE: Average (8-10) Steady (11-12) Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: 1 HD: 15 , 650 (normal) or 1,400 (spell user)
2 HD: 35
3 HD: 65

Avians, whether magical or mundane in nature, are among the
most interesting creatures ever to evolve. Their unique physiol-
ogy sets them apart from all other life, and their grace and beauty
have earned them a place of respect and adoration in the tales of
many races.

Flightless Bird

These large avians are typified by the ostrich (3 HD), emu (2 HD),
and rhea (1 HD). Although they share many of the unique physi-
ological adaptations that have enabled other avians to take wing
and break the bonds of earth, they are forever chained to the sur-
face, unable to fly.

The ostrich is a large, flightless bird that lives on the grassy
plains and rolling savannas of tropical and subtropical regions. It
is the largest and strongest of mundane avians, standing fully
eight feet from foot to crown and weighing up to 300 pounds. The
animal’s small head and short, flat beak are perched atop a long,
featherless neck. When it runs, an ostrich fans out its wings for
stability and employs its powerful legs to attain speeds of up to 40
miles per hour. If forced to fight, an ostrich uses its legs to deliver
a powerful kick that inflicts 1d8 points of damage.

Male ostriches have black bodies with white wings and tail
feathers. Females, as is typical in many animals, are far less color-
ful than the males, being a dull gray or brown in color. The white
feathers of the male are highly prized by merchants, as they can
be used in hat- and dress-making. In many parts of the world, os-
trich farms are not uncommon.

Male ostriches often mate with as many as four females. Larger
flocks of ostriches consist of 1d4 + 1 males, their mates, and their
offspring. The females lay their eggs in a single nest, where they
are incubated by the females by day and guarded by the males at
night.

The emu is another large, flightless bird that is almost as large
as the ostrich. An emu can reach a height of six feet from foot to
crown and a weight of 130 pounds. Unlike those of their larger
cousins, the wings of an emu are rudimentary appendages hidden
beneath their coarse, hair-like feathers. An emu’s plumage is dull

brown, darker on the head, neck, and along its back, while its un-
derside is much lighter.

The rhea greatly resembles a small ostrich. Rheas average three
feet in height and 80 pounds in weight. The most noteworthy dif-
ferences between the two species are in the structure of the feet
(ostriches have two toes while rheas have three) and the tail feath-
ers. While the ostrich has elegant, flowing tail plumes, the rhea’s
are far shorter. Long feathers on the sides of the rhea, however,
swoop down to cover the stunted tail feathers. These unusual
feathers, like the tail feathers of an ostrich, are sought after by
fashion designers; for this reason rhea are often hunted or raised
on farms. Rheas generally gather in groups of three to six individ-
uals, though this number climbs to as many as 25 during mating
season.

The rhea’s hard beak delivers a peck for 1d4 points of damage.

Boobrie

The boobrie is a giant relative of the stork. Its origins are lost in
mists of ancient time and arcane lore. Although some scholars
suggest that there is a link between the boobrie and the roc, there
seems to be little that the two species have in common (apart from
their great size.)

An adult boobrie stands roughly 12 feet tall and may weigh as
much as 300 pounds. Although its weight may seem low for such
a huge creature, it is important to remember that this animal, like
most fliers, is built very light. When a boobrie is threatened or
comes across a creature too powerful for it to fight, it fluffs up its
feathers to look even more imposing than it already is. When it
does this, a number of long feathers on the back of the boobrie’s
neck become erect, making it look as though the creature were
two or three feet taller.

The boobrie stands on two long, slender legs. Its feet are split
into four slender toes that stretch very wide to enable the creature
to move quickly through marshes and swamps. Although these
legs enable the creature to run at a very high speed, they are fairly
weak when used in combat. A boobrie will hunt primarily with
its beak, which is shaped much like that of a heron, with a hook
Avian

 

like that of an eagle. In addition, its powerful jaw muscles and the
sharp, serrated edge of its beak give it a vicious bite.

A boobrie’s diet is largely made up of giant catfish and other
large denizens of the wetlands. On occasion, though, it hunts for
other prey. When times are rough, the boobrie feeds on all man-
ner of snakes, lizards, and, if it finds them, giant spiders. Its occa-
sional dependence on a diet of creatures that can deliver a toxic
bite has, over the centuries, caused the boobrie to develop an im-
munity to all manner of toxins.

When a boobrie hunts, it finds a grove of tall marsh grass or
similar vegetation and slips into it. Once within its hunting blind,
it remains perfectly still, often for hours at a time, until prey
comes within sight. Then, with a speed which seems uncanny in
such a large creature, it springs forth and attacks. When employ-
ing this means of ambush, a boobrie forces its opponents to suffer
a -3 penalty to their surprise rolls.

If two boobrie are encountered, they are usually (75%) a mated
pair. These adult boobries always have at least 5 hit points per Hit
Die. If the boobries are not adults (25% chance), they are young
with 4 or fewer hit points per Hit Die.

Eblis

Eblis are intelligent avians noted for their cruel nature and evil
ways. Eblis stand much taller than the average human, reaching
heights of up to eight feet. Their bodies look much like those of
storks, with grey, tan, or off-white plumage on their bodies and
sleek black necks. Their heads are narrow and end in long,
needle-like beaks that are glossy black in color.

Eblis speak a language of chirps, whistles, and deep-throated
hoots. While it is all but impossible for humans to duplicate, it
can be understood by the trained listener. In addition, 25% of all
spellcasting eblis have managed to learn a rudimentary version of
common, which permits them to converse with those they
encounter.

When an eblis engages in physical combat, it lashes out with its
beak to peck at opponents. Eblis are very agile, which not only
accounts for their excellent Armor Class, but also enables them to
make up to four stabbing attacks each round.

Each community of eblis is led by one individual that has a lim-
ited spellcasting capability. Eblis of this type can cast 2d4 spells
per day; eblis cast as 3rd-level spellcasters. To determine which
spells are available, roll 1d8 and consult the following table. Du-
plicate rolls indicate that the spell may be employed more than
once per day.

Hypnotic pattern
Whispering wind

1 Audible glamer
2 Change self

3 Hypnotism

4 Spook

5 Wall of fog

6 Blur

7

g

Eblis love shiny objects (like gems); they often decorate their
homes with these. In fact, even the most wise and powerful of the
eblis can be bribed with a particularly impressive jewel. When
characters attempt to loot an eblis lair, note that its treasures are
woven into the nest itself and thus require some effort to remove.
In addition to those items that men find valuable (like coins and
gems), dozens of other objects may have caught an eblis’s eye.
While these may range from shards of broken glass to shiny
pieces of metal from a broken suit of armor, they are always
worthless. Sorting through these items in search of valuable ones
can be fairly time consuming.

An eblis community consists of 2d4 huts, each of which is in-
habited by a male and his mate. In addition, 30% of the huts have
a single egg or chick in them as well. These huts are built from
straw and grasses common to the marsh around the community.
Care is taken by the eblis to make these huts very difficult to de-
tect. In fact, only a determined search of the area by a ranger or
someone with the animal lore proficiency is likely to uncover the
community.

All eblis secrete an oil that coats their feathers and provides
them with some protection from the elements. In addition, this oil
is naturally resistant to fire, granting the eblis a +1 bonus to all
saving throws against fire- and flame-based attacks. Any damage
caused by a fire- or flame-based attack is lessened by -1 for each
die of damage.

The evil nature of the eblis is best seen in the delight it takes in
hunting and killing. When an eblis spots travelers who have ob-
jects it desires for its nest, it attacks. Since the eblis is cunning,
these attacks often take the forms of ambushes. There is reason to
believe, however, that the true evil behind the eblis culture is not
in the average members of the race, but in their spellcasting lead-
ers. Past experience has shown that common eblis are, by and
large, far less prone to evil or cruelty than their masters. Thus
many scholars have come to believe that the eblis spellcasters ac-
quire their power through some evil deed and are forever warped
into malefic beings.
Bat, Deep

aKa NGA

+g:

INN
a_i!

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Azmyth Night Hunter Sinister Werebat
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any temperate/any Any temperature/any Any/any Any/any
FREQUENCY: Rare Uncommon Rare Very Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary Hunting Packs Bands Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Nocturnal/any Any See below
DIET: Omnivore Carnivore Omnivore Any/blood (in bat form)
INTELLIGENCE: High (13-14) Average to high (8-14) Average to Varies

Exceptional (8-16)
TREASURE: Nil M, O, Z (in lair) Nil All possible
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral Neutral evil Lawful neutral Varies
NO. APPEARING: 1 1-12 (1-30 in lair) 1-6 1 (1-2)
ARMOR CLASS: 2 6 3 7
MOVEMENT: 3, FI 24 (A) 2, FI 18 (A) 2, FI 21 (A) Varies (usually 12)/1, Fl
14(C)

HIT DICE: 2 2+2 4+4 Varies
THACO: 19 19 17 13
NO. OF ATTACKS: 2 4 1 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1/1-2 1-4/1-2/1-2/1-6 or 3-12 2-5 1-2
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Magic use Nil Magic use Bite effects
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Magic use Nil Energy field Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 40% Nil 70% Nil
SIZE: S (3' wingspan, M (up to 7 wingspan) L (9 wingspan) M

length up to 4’)
MORALE: Elite (14) Steady (11) Champion (15-16) Varies (12+)
XP VALUE: 650 175 2,000 Varies (usually 975)

“Deep bats” are Faerunian varieties of bat known to be
active in both the surface world and the Underdark. The
four most important of these species are described in this
collective entry.

Azmyth

Azmyths live on flowers, small plants, and insects. They
are solitary wanderers, though they do have “favorite
haunts” to which they often return. They often form
partnerships with humanoids for mutual benefit, some-
times forming loyal friendships with such beings.
Azmyths have been known to accompany creatures for
their entire lives, and then accompany the creatures’
offspring. The lifespan and mating details of azmyths are
presently unknown. They are not familiars as wizards
understand the term; no direct control can be exercised
over one except by spells.

Azymths have crested heads and bearded chins, white,
pupilless eyes, and leathery gray, mauve, or emerald green
skin. They emit shrill squeaks of alarm or rage, and
endearing, liquid chuckles of delight or amusement. They
communicate by 60’-range telepathy, and have 90’-range
infravision. They can know alignment thrice per day,
become invisible (self only, for 6 rounds or less; ending
when the azymth makes any successful attack) once per
day, and create silence 15’ radius, centered on them-
selves, once a day.

In combat, azmyths bite (1 hp damage) and stab with
their powerful needle-sharp tails ( 1-2 points). Twice per day,
an azmyth can unleash a shocking grasp attack, transmit-
ting 1d8 + 6 points of electrical damage through any direct
physical contact with another creature. This attack can be
combined with a physical attack for cumulative damage.

Night Hunter

This species is also known as a “dragazhar,” after the
adventurer who first domesticated one as a pet, long ago.
Nocturnal in the surface Realms, it is active at any time in
the gloom of the Underdark. It will eat carrion if it must,
but usually hunts small beasts. Desperate dragazhar have
been known to attack livestock, drow, or humans.

Night hunter packs (known as “swoops”) dip down to
bite prey (1d4), rake with their wing claws (1-2 each), and
slash (1d6) or stab (3d4 damage) with their dexterous,
triangular-shaped, razor-sharp tails. They often stalk
their prey, flying low and dodging behind hillocks, ridges,
trees, or stalagmites, so as to attack from ambush. Night
hunters have 180’-range infravision, but rarely surprise
opponents, as they emit weird, echoing loon-like screams
when excited.

Night hunter lairs usually contain over thirty creatures
(three hunting bands or so). They typically live in doubled-
ended caves, or aboveground in tall trees, in dense woods.
Night hunters will not tarry to eat where they feel
endangered, so their lairs often contain treasure fallen
from prey carried there. Night hunters roost head-down-
wards when sleeping. They are velvet black in hue, even to
their claws, and have violet, orange, or red eyes.
Beguiler

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Dry steppes

 

 

 

 

FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day
DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average to high (8-14)
TREASURE: D (L, N, Q)
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1-4
ARMOR CLASS: 9
MOVEMENT: 14

HIT DICE: 2

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 6

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-2(x4)/1-4/1 or by weapon type

 

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Illusion
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Camouflage
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

 

SIZE: S (2' long)
MORALE: Average (8-10)
XP VALUE: 270

The beguiler is a plump quadruped about the size of a small dog.
Somewhat mouse-like in appearance, it has large glistening black
eyes, large ears, and a pointed snout. It is covered with thick,
bluish-black fur that is silky to the touch. The creature can change
its fur color to match its surroundings. When properly cured, the
beguiler’s hide commands high prices in any marketplace.
Beguilers possess razor-sharp retractile claws, enabling the crea-
tures to climb trees and wooden structures with ease. The hairless,
prehensile tail of the beguiler aids in climbing, and can be used to
throw or wield weapons the size of a short sword or smaller.

Combat: The creature’s four sets of claws each inflict 1-2 points of
damage per attack. The beguiler’s bite causes 1-4 points of damage,
and the tail can inflict one point of damage by itself, or by weapon
type if one is used. Any weapon held or thrown by the beguiler’s
tail has a -2 attack penalty

The beguiler has only four claw attacks per round when its tar-
get is prone and the beguiler is on top.

Habitat/Society: The beguiler lives in the dry plains or steppes of
the Eastern Shaar. Dampness suppresses the creature’s ability to
camouflage itself which it can do for 1-4 turns. Unless the crea-
ture’s fur is dry, it is incapable of this coloration change. In regions
of Toril other than the Eastern Shaar, the beguiler is very rare.

The beguiler eats both plants and animals. Its favorite food is
the plump, water-rich cacti prevalent in its environment. It eats
small field mice and the eggs and young of ground-nesting birds to
supplement its diet. Only in times of hunger does the beguiler at-
tack animals larger than itself.

Ecology: A beguiler always sees with true sight. It clearly sees in-
visible creatures and objects. It also ignores illusions and their in-
tended effects. Displaced objects or foes, like the displacer beast,
can be seen where they truly are. Even ethereal creatures close to
the Prime Material Plane can be observed and attacked with ease.

Not only can the creature change the hue of its fur to match the
coloration of its surroundings for 1-4 turns, but even unnatural
colorations, like plaid, can be easily mimicked by the beguiler. It
can remain absolutely motionless during that time, hiding in
shadows with 80% success.

Some spell casters are rumored to have maintained or recreated
this ability in the cured pelt of the beguiler. Many alchemists pay
large sums of money for the remains of the beguiler, usually a gold

 

 

 

 

 

piece value equal to the Experience Value of the creature. The eyes
and frontal lobes of the brain are alternative material components
used in the true sight, detect invisibility, locate object, and the vi-
sion spells.

Many cultures near the Shaar capture beguiler young soon after
the babies are weaned. They make excellent pets that warn their
owners of trespassers. Several mages of Thar have further in-
creased the creature’s value by acquiring the beguiler as a familiar.
These mages have exhibited beguiler-like qualities, detecting hid-
den objects and hiding in shadows.

Cap of the Beguiler
Cost: 2,000 gold pieces
XP Value: 25,000

The cap of the beguiler gives the wearer the ability to see as
though using a true sight spell. Invisible creatures and objects are
clearly seen, and illusions do not have their intended effect. Dis-
placed foes can be seen where they truly are. Only one such cap
can be made from a single beguiler pelt.

If the cap gets wet, the properties it exhibits are nullified until it
is completely dry. Each time the cap gets wet, there is a 10%
chance it molds, causing the properties to dissipate forever.

Cloak of the Beguiler
Cost: 3,000 gold pieces
XP Value: 17,500

The cloak of the beguiler changes its hue and the hue of its wear-
er to match the coloration of the wearer’s surroundings up to three
times a day for 1-4 turns each time. The wearer can remain abso-
lutely motionless during that time if he chooses, Miding in shadows
with 70% success. Ethereal creatures close to the Prime Material
Plane can be observed and attacked with ease.

If the cloak gets wet, the properties it exhibits are nullified until
it is completely dry. Each time the cloak gets wet, there is a 10%
chance it molds, causing the properties to dissipate forever. The
cloak requires 12 animal pelts to construct for the average human.
Cantobele

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Swamps and forests
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average to high
TREASURE: All possible
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil

NO. APPEARING:

 

 

ARMOR CLASS: 7

MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 2 to4

THACO: 2 HD: 19
3 HD: 18
4 HD: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 8

DAMAGE/ATTACK: See below

 

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spell use
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Immune to cold
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

 

SIZE: L (7'-9' long)
MORALE: Champion (15-16)
XP Value: 2 HD: 650

3 HD: 975

4 HD: 1,400

Cantobeles are large, heavily-muscled creatures that are sleek in
the manner of the great cats. A cantobele has a long, broad tail
with very short fur, ending in a tuft of long, black hairs. The rest
of the creature’s body is covered with thick, double-coated fur,
ranging in color from gray-white to tawny, depending on habitat
and season. The adult cantobele changes color with the season
for camouflage, but darker, more intense coloration denotes
youth. The long mane of the cantobele matches its body and tail
fur. A cantobele’s eyes are startlingly human in appearance and
display a great intelligence. The irises are brown or mauve.

Cantobeles are encountered in wilderness areas, particularly in
swamps and forested ravines. A cantobele has a high-pitched,
soft, feminine voice, and uses it effectively to lure prey and de-
ceive hostile creatures. Hiding in underbrush, it employs its voice
in combination with its innate ability of ESP (90 yard range) and
tongues. Cantobeles hide from view until their prey is close
enough to spring upon. The name of the creature derives from
the strange, beautiful ringing sound, like the chorus of chiming
bells, which the cantobele emits after making a kill.

Combat: Cantobeles fight with all three pairs of legs and with
their powerful fangs. A cantobele’s tail can also strike, but it is
usually used for balance when the creature uses all its claws.
Cantobeles prefer to spring upon opponents, knocking them flat
and raking and biting before the victim can rise to protect itself.

When a cantobele attempts to knock an opponent off its feet,
the victim must roll a successful Dexterity check with a -4 pen-
alty to maintain balance. If the check fails, the victim falls, and
the cantobele attacks with a +4 bonus with each of its attacks.
The following chart lists the damage the cantobele causes accord-
ing to its Hit Dice total.

Hit Dice Claw Bite Tail
2 1-4 2-8 1-6
3 1-6 3-12 1-8
4 1-8 4-16 1-10

 

 

iit ik

 

 

 

A cantobele can cast one misdirection spell per day. It com-
monly uses this spell to lure heavily armed foes away from its
lair. It can cast one ice storm spell every 12 hours as well. When
casting any of these spells, the cantobele can take no other action
during that round.

Cantobeles are immune to cold-based attacks, including natu-
rally occurring frigid weather. They have 110-foot infravision
and eyes that filter out glare. Cantobeles are never blinded or
dazzled by snow or bright lights. Their second eyelid continually
filters out the intense light to protect their eyes.

Their claws and six-legged gait make them sure-footed on the
slickest ice, in deep snow, or on tree boughs. Spells such as grease
and fumble have no effect on them. They can climb any surface,
except sheer walls and cliffs, at their normal movement rate.
Sheer surfaces reduce their movement by one-half.

Habitat/Society: Cantobeles prefer to live in deserted and humid
climes. They are most prevalent in the Impresk and Shalane Lake
areas where the waters swamp the surrounding territories. They
also live in the Rebban River area in vast numbers. Elsewhere,
they are rarely seen, if ever. Cantobeles mate once every three
years during early spring, becoming catatonic and dying if a
mate is not found within two months of their breeding time. The
male cantobele bears the young and cares for them for one year.
A litter numbers between four and sixteen young, but five to
eight (1d4 +4) is most common.

Ecology: Many cities near Shalane Lake have placed a bounty on
the cantobele in recent years as a response to alleged man-eating
tendencies. Cities such as Surke pay as much as 50 gold pieces for
a verified kill. There is no limit to the bounty. Because such boun-
ties exist, many sages fear the animal will become extinct. These
same sages now offer a bounty of their own. They pay 65 gold
pieces per cantobele if it is captured alive, so they can be placed
in more deserted locations such as the Rifhake Lake in the center
of the Great Rift.
Cat

BABETTE / fi i ec PUSUstne a)

SE ESSEESES Vos
Guxaanta Nae

__ wee)

 

 

 

 

Domestic Wild Elven Luck Eater Change Cat

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: = Any/Inhabited Any /Non-arctic Temperate/Forests | Any/Non-arctic Temperate/ Forests
and plains

FREQUENCY: Common Uncommon Rare Rare Rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary Solitary Solitary Solitary Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any Any Any Any

DIET: Carnivore Carnivore Carnivore Special Carnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Animal (1) Animal (1) Semi- to low (2-7) — Low (5-7) Animal (1)

TREASURE: Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil

ALIGNMENT: Neutral Neutral Neutral Neutral Neutral

NO. APPEARING: _ 1(1-12)2 1(2-5)3 1 1 1

ARMOR CLASS: 6 5 4 7 7

MOVEMENT: 15 18 18 15 15 (45 in sprint)

HIT DICE: 1-5 hp 1 3+6 4 4

THACO: 20 20 17 17 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2 3 3 Nil 3

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-2/1 1-2 (x3) 12 (x2)/13 Nil 1-3(x2)/2-12

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Rake Rake See below See below Rake

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below See below See below See below See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil Nil 20% Nil Nil

SIZE: T (1’ tall) T (1 tall) T (1’ tall) T (1’ tall) S (3’ tall)

MORALE: Average (8-10) Average (8-10) Elite (13-14) Elite (13-14) Fanatic (17-18)

XP VALUE: 35 65 1,400 420 270

The cat is one of the most beloved creatures in the known world.
Treasured by many civilized cultures, the cat is actually wor-
shiped in many societies as a divinity.

Combat: Cats are among the most efficient hunters in the
world. The sleek grace with which they move and the stealthy
manner in which they stalk prey enables them to catch many ani-
mals off guard (those attacked by a cat suffer a -5 penalty to
their surprise rolls). Because of their keen senses and great agility,
cats are surprised only on a 1. A cat’s keen hearing, eyesight, and
night vision make it equally effective when hunting at night or
during the day.

A cat’s main attacks are with its forepaws (counted as a single
attack in domestic breeds) and with its sharp teeth. If the cat hits
with its front claws, it can employ its powerful back legs in a
rake. In domestic cats, a rake inflicts 1-2 points of damage.

Cats are agile climbers and can scale trees or move about in
them at half their normal movement rate. They are very strong
creatures for their size; they can leap great distances to avoid ob-
stacles or to spring onto prey.

Habitat/Society: Cats are one of the most common animals
found in settled regions of the world. In many cultures, cats are
often found in the homes of nobles and peasants alike. In some
cultures, cats have the status of divine beings and are treated with
great respect. On the other hand, in some nations, cats are feared
and hated as minions of evil beings.

Ecology: Cats have served many roles in their relationships
with humanoid races. While their role as rodent controllers is by
far the most common, cats have also been used by hunters to re-
cover downed birds and similar small prey.

Domestic Cat

There are nearly 40 breeds of domestic cat in the world. They all
share a number of features and characteristics, with only changes
in outward appearance differentiating the various breeds. The
average adult cat weighs between eight and ten pounds, but
spoiled domestic cats can reach a weight of 25 pounds.
Domestic cats are descended from the great cats (see Volume 1
of the Monstrous Compendium) and retain many of their physi-

cal characteristics. For instance, they have retractable claws that
can be extended for traction when climbing or drawn in for speed
when running. Domestic cats have also retained the keen senses
of their ancestors, making them very adept at hunting and stalk-
ing prey.

Domestic cats do not normally attack animals larger than
themselves, but they often chase and kill mice, birds, rats, and
other small creatures.

A well-treated domestic cat will live for about 15 years. The
gestation period for kittens is 60 to 65 days, with 1d4 + 1 off-
spring in each litter. A mother cat is very protective of her young
and will fight to the death to defend them from strangers or hos-
tile creatures. Kittens are weaned when they are about eight
weeks old.

Domestic cats can be encountered in the wilderness, as they oc-
casionally go wild and live out their lives far from civilization.

Wild Cat

Wild cats are very similar to the domestic cats that are descended
from them, with most species being fully interfertile. As a rule,
wild cats are somewhat tougher and stronger than their pampered
cousins, making them more capable hunters. Unlike the domestic
cat, a wild cat’s front paws attack separately. If both of these at-
tacks succeed, the wild cat can rake its opponent with its rear
claws (it receives two additional attacks for 1-2 points of damage
each). Some wild cats are domestic breeds that were abandoned
and adapted to wilderness life.

Elven Cat

Over the years, the wild cats the elves brought among them ab-
sorbed something of the magical nature of their keepers and
evolved into the wondrous elven cats of today. Whether special
magical means were used to promote this evolution is unclear, but
it seems probable that some such force was involved.

Elven cats are very intelligent, with many being able to con-
verse in a rudimentary from of elvish. In some cases, elven cats
have attached themselves to families of gnomes, brownies, and
other woodland creatures. In these instances, they also speak a
basic form of those languages.

Elven cats make separate attack rolls for each of their fore
claws and can rake with their rear claws for 1-3 points of damage
Cat

 

each if both of the fore claw attacks succeed. Elven cats are even
more stealthy than domestic cats, imposing a -6 penalty to op-
ponents’ surprise rolls (while being surprised only on a 1). Elven
cats can move silently 99.9% of the time and can hide in shadows
(in wilderness areas) with a 90% chance of success.

Unlike many other species of felines, elven cats enjoy swimming
and playing in water. They are, like all cats, excellent climbers
and can leap 20 feet or more with ease.

Elven cats are highly magical. They often use their spell-like
abilities to deal with adversaries they prefer to avoid. They have
a limited form of ESP that enables them to sense the intentions of
other beings and thus determine who is hostile to them. Once per
day they may employ either an enlarge or trip spell. In the case of
the former spell, their natural combat capabilities (Hit Dice and
damage per attack) are doubled. Twice per day they may invoke a
reduce or tree spell. The latter spell is similar to the priest's tree,
but the cat may only assume the form of a single limb. At all
times, elven cats are able to pass without trace. In all cases, these
spell-like powers act as if the cats are 9th-level casters.

Luck Eater

Luck eaters look like slender, short-haired domestic cats with
golden or black fur. They impose a -5 penalty to the surprise
rolls of those it encounters, though it is wholly unable to inflict
physical damage on another creature.

When encountered, a luck eater begins to purr softly, causing
all creatures within 30 feet to become attracted to the animal un-
less they succeed with a saving throw vs. spell (with a -2 pen-
alty). Those who succeed are unaffected, but a new save must be
rolled each round they remain within 30 feet of the luck eater.
Those under the creature’s spell want to bring it with them and
protect it from harm. The luck eater always permits this, staying
for 1d4 + 1 hours, purring all the time.

While the luck eater is with a party, all creatures within its
range suffer a -2 penalty to all saving throws, attack rolls, and
ability checks. In addition, all damage they inflict is reduced by
10%. In some unknown way, the luck eater is able to feed itself
with the shifts in probability it induces.

If the luck eater’s companions have not fed it within three turns
(that is, no rolls are attempted by anyone within 30 feet of the
creature), it alters its purr slightly. All of its previous victims must
now roll another saving throw vs. spell (one per round while

within 30 feet of the luck eater). Those who fail attack the next
creature they encounter.

If the luck eater continues unfed for another 30 minutes, it al-
ters its purr once again. This time, a successful saving throw vs.
spell is required to avoid attacking the nearest creature (friend or
foe), excepting only the luck eater itself. This battle continues for
ten rounds or until a death occurs. The luck eater always slips
away during the melee.

In any event, the luck eater departs after 1d4 + 1 hours in the
company of its benefactors. Those previously attracted to the
luck eater regain their senses 1d6 turns after leaving the animal's
aura.

Change Cat

The change cat is a product of tampering by ancient magical
forces. In effect, a change cat is two creatures in one. Its natural
form, and that in which it spends most of its time, is that of a do-
mestic cat. In this body, it is identical to that animal in all re-
spects. At will, however, the change cat can transform itself into a
large, cheetah-like plains cat. The statistics listed are for the latter
form.

The change cat was created by a powerful magician long ago to
act as a faithful pet and a sentinel for his most valuable treasures.
Being very fond of cats and having a strong dislike for guards, he
set about to create the perfect house cat for a powerful wizard.
Although many of these animals now roam the wilds of the
world, they are still encountered as pets in the homes of powerful
and rich people.

Change cats are fond of humans, elves, and half-elves, suspi-
cious of gnomes, dwarves, and halflings, and have a great dislike
of races such as goblins, orcs, and half-orcs.

In its larger form, the change cat can sprint with a movement
rate of 45 for two rounds. This effort is quite exhausting, how-
ever, requiring the cat to rest for two rounds afterward before it
can sprint again. A change cat can switch forms in one round. It
may remain in either form for as long as it desires (though it pre-
fers to remain in its normal cat form when not in combat).

If a change cat is treated kindly by a human, elf, or half-elf, it
will often (75%) adopt that person and follow him around, giving
no hint of its unique nature and special abilities. If its new com-
panion is attacked, however, there is a 50% chance that the
change cat transforms and comes to their aid.
Chitine

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any subterranean
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Tribal
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)
TREASURE: D (K, Q)
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil
NO. APPEARING: 10-60
ARMOR CLASS: 9 (6)
MOVEMENT: 12, Wb 9
HIT DICE: 2

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6/1-6/1-6

 

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Webbing traps
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Standard

 

SIZE: S (4’ tall)
MORALE: Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 65

Chitines are small humanoids with four arms that build with
webbing like humans build with stone or wood. This diminutive
race of humanoids is most notable for its four arms which are
jointed to allow for extra movement in ways that human limbs
could never move. Their faces are human-looking, although they
have multi-faceted eyes and mandibles protruding from their
mouths. Long stringy black hair falls in a tangle from their skulls
and grows down their backs, like the mane of a horse.

The skin of the chitines is gray and mottled. A special oil is
secreted that negates the adhesive effects of spider webbing. The
palms of their hands and the soles of their feet are covered in
dozens of tiny hooks, which allow them to climb textured surfac-
es with no loss of speed.

Chitines wear clothing made from dried and processed silk.
Bits of colored rocks, carved bones, and such are frequently
woven throughout. They always keep their hands and feet un-
covered. They carry their tools in pouches woven into their
clothing. Chitines speak the language of the drow, and some-
times know a bit of other subterranean languages.

Combat: Chitines are most fond of traps and ambushes. Fre-
quently they build a normal-looking spider web with a seemingly
natural way around it. The web is a false trap and a pit, drop net,
or similar trap that is sprung when the route is chosen. They are
extremely clever and vicious with their traps. Their warriors
commonly carry javelins and wear the webbing equivalent of
studded leather armor. They carry short swords for melee com-
bat. Usually they have weapons in three of their hands and a
hardened webbing shield in the fourth. They are overly sensitive
to sunlight and fight at a -1 penalty to THACO and damage
when in sunlight.

Because the chitines are able to build with webbing, they may
devise all sorts of nasty tricks. By sticking dust and rock chips to
a mat of webbing, they can make a very convincing natural stone

 

 

 

 

 

wall or floor. By means of a secret process, they can harden
webbing into a bone-like material. It is slightly flexible, not
sticky, and hard enough to slice or penetrate armor. They can
weave such deadly spikes and edges into their traps to cause 1d6
points of damage per spike or edge.

Weapons and armor made from hardened webbing works just
like normal items made by humans. However, the items deterio-
rate after several months if not treated with the oil secreted by
their skin. Hardened webbing is susceptible to fire. Two rounds
of contact with flame ignites hardened webbing, burning the item
away in 2d4 rounds. Body armor made of hardened webbing
cannot exceed Armor Class 4.

Habitat/Society: Chitines are only found underground. Their ca-
vern villages are located in the center of a maze of trap-laden
webbing. The hardened webbing dwellings resemble domed
houses, complete with windows and decorative shapes adorning
them. These homes can be located on any surface, including the
ceiling. Bridges of webbing cross the town, providing easy path-
ways. Suspended in the center of the cavern is usually a heart-
shaped temple devoted to the evil goddess Lolth.

Chitines are cast-off experiments of the drow. They have in-
creased in numbers over the centuries, and even now plot to
overthrow the drow who are Lolth’s favorites. They are devoted
to their spider queen and will do anything in her name. The
priestesses of the chitines are rumored to be of a different and
more powerful race, more akin to Lolth herself.

Ecology: A chitine can spin sticky spider webbing at the rate of
one foot per round. The webbing is spun from an orifice in its
stomach. Chitines eat anything that moves, sucking the fluids
from the victim and leaving the dried remains on the cavern floor
underneath their temple. Chitines are hunted by both drow and
driders.
Cildabrin

Fran San
IVGOTVEWN
i A Or MKS)

-

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Warm subterranean areas
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE TYPE: Cor D
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: 1-2

ARMOR CLASS: 5
MOVEMENT: 15

HIT DICE: 11

THACO: 9

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACKS: 1-12/1-12/1-6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 20%

 

SIZE: H (13’ across, 6’-10’ high)
MORALE: 14 (Elite)
XP VALUE: 7,000

Cildabrins are a race of either huge, intelligent spiders with ele-
ments of a giant scorpion’s anatomy, or a race of huge scorpions
with elements of a spider’s anatomy. No one knows for certain.
Cildabrins never give the same answer twice, if they stop trying
to eat the questioner long enough to answer at all.

A cildabrin’s body is black and furry. The cildabrin’s eight eyes
are turquoise blue. The front two legs end in scorpion-like pin-
cers, and there is a supple, fur-covered tail with an 8-inch stinger
at its tip. They have infravision with a 120-foot range.

Combat: When in melee, cildabrins attack with their claws and
their stinger. If the cildabrin hits with a pincer, the victim must
make a successful saving throw vs. bend bars to escape. If the
saving throw is not successful, the victim automatically takes
7-12 points of crushing damage in the subsequent round. The vic-
tim can attempt to escape once per round, until the cildabrin re-
leases him at its death, or until the victim loses consciousness.
The stinger can reach any medium-sized or larger targets that are
in melee with it. The stinger is equipped with Type O poison.
Perhaps because of the presence of a tail, these beasts lack
spinnerets. Fortunately, they are a highly magical race with sev-
eral magical abilities to compensate for this weakness. The cilda-

 

 

 

 

 

brin can cast web of darkness 15’ radius, and silence, 15’ radius
three times a day, one per round. Cildabrins also have a perma-
nent spider climb effect. They are immune to all web spells.

Cildabrins prefer to ambush their prey from where they hide,
usually from within an area of silence. They often cast a web
spell and move into melee. A darkness spell is usually saved to
protect the creature as it retreats.

Habitat/Society: As solitary creatures, cildabrins come together
only to mate. If two cildabrins are encountered, there is doubt-
less a nest of 10-40 large, purple eggs nearby, probably in an area
of darkness. Cildabrins appreciate the value of treasure and often
leave some visible to attract prey. It is also valuable for those oc-
casions when the cildabrin wishes to bribe or buy items it deems
valuable or items it wishes to protect, such as its eggs.

Ecology: Cildabrins eat any animal that they can catch. Once the
food is caught and paralyzed or killed, the cildabrin retreats to its
lair to eat. The lair is usually a warm, dark cave. It cannot con-
sume inorganic material, so items like armor, shields, and weap-
ons are stripped from the prey and set aside, either in a pile in the
rear of the cave or on the cildabrin’s “bait piles.”
Dimensional Warper

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any

 

 

 

 

 

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Supra to genius (19-20)

TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 1

MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 8-10

THACO: 8 or 9 HD: 13
10 HD: 11

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-3/1-3/1-6

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

 

SIZE: M (6’ tall)

MORALE: Elite (14)

XP VALUE: 8 or 9 HD: 3,500
10 HD: 5,000

A dimensional warper has a snake-like body and stands on two
long, thin legs. Its long, thin, flexible arms each end in one hook-
like claw. There is a sturdy, wing-like membrane that stretches
between the arms and legs ending at the claws and feet respec-
tively. These “wings” are not used for flight. The warper’s head is
bald and earless. It has large, round eyes with cat-like pupils. The
creature stands about 6 feet tall and has a wing span of about 5
feet. It is covered in a thick, leathery hide and has a long lizard-
like tail. The dimensional warper has never been encountered on
the Prime Material Plane.

Occasionally, for reasons of their own, dimensional warpers
have communicated with humans and demihumans. These ad-
venturers have reported that the warpers come to the Prime Ma-
terial Plane to learn about the creatures native to the plane.
However, only those warpers who are old and wise can visit this
plane. If a dimensional warper is encountered, there is an 85%
chance that it is a scholar; otherwise it is a master. A master is
identified by the ring of symbols tattooed around its head and
down its back which are a sign of its rank.

Combat: Dimensional warpers generally prefer to observe rather
than fight. However, if it feels it has learned all it can from
watching a group of adventurers, it probably attacks them to
learn first-hand about their fighting skills. It only wants to learn
about them, not kill them.

A warper attacks once with each of its claws and once with its
long whip-like tail. If the warper cannot easily remain in control
of the battle, it uses its abilities to warp the dimensions of height,
width, depth, and time. It can enlarge itself, as per the spell, three
times per day. It can haste itself or slow another being, as per the
spells, three times per day. It can use dimension door once per

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

turn. A dimensional warper can also make itself two-dimen-
sional, as per the spell duo-dimension, at will.

A master also has the ability to time stop once per week. How-
ever, it does not use this ability to give itself the opportunity to
kill its opponents. The master uses it only to leave the battle if it
is in danger of being killed or if it is being forced to kill its subjects
to avoid being killed.

Habitat/Society: The warper society is based entirely on seeking
knowledge. Dimensional warpers are curious, knowledge-
seeking beings. They spend most of their lives observing other
creatures and learning as much as possible about them. Adult
warpers are usually scholars. However, the oldest and most-
learned warpers earn the title master and are respected and hon-
ored by the others in the society.

Warpers prefer to live where they can observe other creatures
without being seen. If possible they travel from place to place,
finding hiding places in cities from which they can watch. They
have also been known to hide along roads or trails or in
dungeons where there are adventurers and monsters regularly
passing by. It is possible for a dimensional warper to be able to
speak almost any language, as they study their subjects intently.
They are very interested in understanding any conversations
they overhear.

Ecology: Dimensional warpers do not generally eat the creatures
they observe as they do not approve of devouring intelligent
creatures and non-intelligent animals do not make very interest-
ing subjects for them. No one has ever seen the home of a warper
or knows how old warpers live to be.
Dragon, Deep

SeoT EER J

ALINS|

oa ah
fal

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: — Hill and mountain caverns, sub-
terranean

FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary or clan

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivorous

INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (15- 16)

TREASURE: Special

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil

NO. APPEARING: 1 (2-5)

ARMOR CLASS: 0 (base)

MOVEMENT: 12, F130 (C), Br 6, Sw 9

HIT DICE: 14 (base)

THACO: 8 (base)

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 + special

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 3-12/3-12/3-24

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Variable
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Variable

 

SIZE: H (24’ base)
MORALE: Fanatic (17-18)
XP VALUE: Variable

Deep dragons are little known on the surface world. They
are the old, wise, wide-ranging “silent hunters” of the
Underdark. “The drakes of the depths” are cunning and
patient, placing their survival—followed by their joy of
hunting —above all. Deep dragons carefully amass and
hide treasure in various caches, guarded with traps and
magic. They are able to use most magic items, and will
retain those they seize for personal use.

Deep dragons are an iridescent, eye-catching maroon
when they hatch. Soft-scaled and unable to change form,
they keep to their birth-lairs until they have mastered both
their other forms—that of a giant, winged worm or snake,
a bipedal human (or drow) form.

Combat: Deep dragons burrow and fight with their
powerful, stone-rending claws, tearing plate armor, bony
carapaces, bones and flesh alike. They love to fight and to
hunt prey through the lightless caverns of the Underdark,
employing their various forms to follow prey.

In snake form, they are AC 6; MV 9, FI 4 (D), Sw 11. They
lose their claw attacks, but gain a constriction attack
(successful attack roll required, does 3d8 damage/round,
hampers victim’s movement, spellcasting, and attacks:
causing -1 on all attack rolls and a 1-point armor class
penalty).

In human form, a deep dragon is AC 10, MV 12, Sw 12,
and does damage by spell or weapon type. Armor can be
worn, but it is always destroyed (doing the dragon 2d4
damage in the process) in any transformation of shape. A
deep dragon can alter the size, shape, hue and features of
its bipedal form to resemble a human, elf (surface or drow),
half-elf, half-orc, orc, hobgoblin, dwarf, duergar, or any
similar creature of like size. It can do this well enough to
always be taken for a being of such a race, but is only 66%
likely to copy a specific being well enough to be mistaken

 

 

for that individual.

Deep dragons are wary in battle and approach, but find
spell and claw-to-hand combat well-nigh irresistible. They
will avoid obvious traps, ambushes, and open combat with
magically-strong, numerous opponents trying to find
them, but delight in stalking prey, pouncing on creatures
without warning, and using their spells to bury opponents
under rockfalls, or smiting with destructive spells.

Breath weapon/special abilities: A deep dragon’s breath
weapon is a cone of flesh-corrosive gas 50’ long, 40’ wide,
and 30’ high. Creatures in the cloud can save versus
breath weapon for half damage (if they have dry, exposed
skin, they save against the flesh-eating gas at -2). Cloth,
metal and wood are not affected. Leather, however, is in
the same position as dry, exposed skin.

Deep dragons cast spells at 9th level, adjusted by their
combat modifiers. Deep dragons are born with infrav-
ision, innate immunities to charm, sleep, and hold
magics, and the ability to detect magic unerringly. They
also have true seeing. Deep dragons are immune to
extremes of heat and cold (-3 on each die of damage
taken, to a minimum of 1 hp/die).

As deep dragons age, they gain the following additional
powers:

Very young: assume snake form three times/day (no time
limit on form, can change back at will).

Young: assume bipedal or “human” form thrice/ day.

Juvenile: gain one additional form change (each form) per
day, gain ability to regenerate 1d4 hp every turn.

Adult: regenerate ability strengthens, to 1d4 hp every 6
rounds. Gains ability of free action at will.
Dragon, Deep

 

Mature adult: regenerate ability increases, to 1d4 hp
every 4 rounds. Gains ability to levitate three times/ day
(usable in combination with free action).

Old: gains the ability to transmute rock to mud and use
telekinesis three times/ day.

Very old: gains the ability to move earth three times/ day.

Venerable: gains the ability to passwall twice a day, and
disintegrate (non-living matter only, but can be used on
undead or the clothing and gear worn and carried by a
living being) twice per day.

Wyrm: gains an additional use/day of all powers gained
from “Old” age to date, also the ability to stone shape twice
per day, and use tongues once/day.

Great wyrm: the power to use repulsion thrice/day is
gained, affecting undead and all living creatures except
other true dragons. One additional daily use of stone
shape and tongues is also gained.

Habitat/Society: Deep dragons roam the Underdark. They
are great explorers, and even venture (particularly when
they are young adults) up and about the surface world
from time to time—particularly to regain stolen treasure,
take revenge on foes, and to seize or steal magic.

Otherwise, deep dragons are found in trapped, well-
defended lairs in the Underdark. They often use their
powers to reach caverns inaccessible to most creatures
(including themselves in full-size dragon form), and to
fashion physical, monstrous (transplanting harmful fungi
and similar creatures), and magical traps to defend them.
Deep dragons often work with drow, as guardians that the
drow feed regularly with slaves, captives, and drow who
have earned the death penalty.

Ecology: Deep dragons have been known to eat almost
anything, but they particularly prize the flesh of clams (!),
fish, kuo-toa, and aboleth. They view cloakers and mind
flayers as dangerous rivals in the Underdark, and seek to
eliminate them whenever possible. Deep dragons avoid
confrontations (or even openly revealing their presence) to
other dragons, if possible, and will never fight or steal from
others of their own kind.

DMs are reminded to consult Volume One of the
Monstrous Compendium when using this monster; the
powers and characteristics generally shared by dragons
(see 2-page “Dragons” general entry) apply to Deep Drag-
ons,

Age Base Let’ Tail Lgt' AC Breath Spells: Wizard/Priest MR Treasure Type XP Value
Weapon

1 1-5 1-4 3 2d8+ 1 Nil Nil Nil 2,000
2 5-14 4-12 2 4d8+2 Nil Nil Nil 3,000
3 14-23 12-21 1 6d8+3 Nil Nil Nil 4,000
4 23-32 21-28 0 8d8+4 1 Nil H,Q 6,000
5 32-4 1 28-36 1 10d8+5 2 25% H,Qx2,E 8,000
6 41-50 36-45 2 12d8+6 2,1 30% H,Qx3,E,S 10,000
7 50-59 45-54 3 14d8+7 3,2 35 % Hx 2,Q x 4E,S 12,000
8 59-68 54-62 4 16d8+8 4,2,1/1 40% Hx2,0x4,E5,T 15,000
9 68-77 62-70 5 18d8+9 4,2,2/2 45% Hx3,0x5,E,5,T 16,000
10 77-86 70-78 6 20d8+10 4,3,2,1/2,1 50% H x 3,Q,ES,T,U 17,000
11 86-95 78-85 7 22d8+11 4,3,3,2/3,2 55% H x 3,Q,ES,T,U,V 18,000
12 95- 104 85-94 -& 24d8+12 4,3,3,2,1/3,3,1 60% H,Q,E,S,T,U,V,X,Z 19,000
Elf, Aquatic

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate/Shallow salt water
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Bands

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: High to genius (14-18)
TREASURE: K, Q, (LO, X, Y)
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic good

NO. APPEARING: 20-120

ARMOR CLASS: 6 (9)

MOVEMENT: 9,S5w15

HIT DICE: 1+1

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: lor2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-8 (weapon)

SPECIAL ATTACKS:
SPECIAL DEFENSES:
MAGIC RESISTANCE:

+1 with spears and tridents
See below
90% to sleep and charm spells

SIZE: M (6' + tall)
MORALE: Elite (13)
XP VALUE: 420

Beneath the quiet waves of wild coastlines can be found the
aquatic, or sea elves, cousins to their woodland counterparts in
demeanor and outlook.

Aquatic elves live for several centuries under the sea, and mem-
bers of other races often see in their eyes the effects of such great
age. Otherwise, sea elves resemble any other humanoid race in
the prime of life. They have gill slits on either side of their throats,
and greenish-silver skin. Their hair is usually stringy, with shades
running from emerald green to deep blue. Males usually wear
their hair short, while few females bother cutting their hair until it
reaches four feet in length or so. Unlike mermen, aquatic elves
have legs and usually wear clothes. Their dress is woven from un-
derwater plants and reeds, and is quite intricate, with subtle de-
signs, most often in greens, blacks, and browns. Sea elves speak
elvish, sahuagin, and an oddly accented common.

Combat: Sea elves are on the whole a peaceful culture. It is a
rare sight to see an aquatic elf launch an attack, and rarer still for
an entire band to ready for war. But when the time comes to do
so, aquatic elves impress their opponents with their fierce bravery
and their skill in battle.

If given their choice of battlefield, aquatic elves would prefer to
fight within a bed of seaweed or on reefs, where their natural col-
oration and stealth skills can give them the chance to hide from
their enemies. They can become as invisible in seaweed as their
woodland cousins can in the forests, imposing a -5 penalty to
their opponent’s surprise roll. Aquatic elves also enjoy the ability
to move unhindered through seaweed, giving them tremendous
advantages in maneuverability.

It is only against great enemies, or when the entire community
is in danger, that sea elves leave their cover to attack. Sea elves
lack the infravision of their land-based cousins, but they can see
clearly at amazing distances. An aquatic elf can count the troops
of an enemy at distances of up to one mile.

The preferred weapons of sea elves are the trident and the
spear. These are used for hunting as well as for combat. The tri-
dent and spear are wielded so often by the sea elves, that they re-
ceive a +1 bonus to their attack roll when using them. The elves
also use combat nets against their enemies. These off-hand weap-
ons bind an opponent if the wielder rolls a successful attack

 

 

 

 

 

 

against AC 6. (Because of their great Dexterity, aquatic elves do
not suffer a penalty to the attack roll for the nets.) Half the time,
only a victim’s weapon (including natural weapons, like a shark's
teeth) is entangled in the net. The rest of the time, the victim is en-
tirely caught. A victim must either break the net (a bend bars roll)
or disentangle himself (a Dexterity check with at a -3 penalty) to
free himself. Magical gestures are impossible in a net.

Like their surface counterparts, aquatic elves demonstrate
strong resistance to sleep and charm spells. Although they are
considered persons for the purposes of a charm person spell,
aquatic elves enjoy a 90% immunity against such magic. And
even if their natural resistance to sleep and charm spells fails,
aquatic elves still get a normal saving throw. This makes it un-
likely that an aquatic elf will fall prey to this type of mind-
influencing spell.

Sea elves are unable to use either wizard or priest spells. The
reasons for this are unknown, but sea elves have legends about
how the drow somehow robbed the aquatic elves of this power,
long before any contemporary elf was born.

In combat, groups of sea elves have various leaders. For every
20 elves in a group, there is an additional 3rd-level fighter. For
every 40 elves, there is an additional 4th-level fighter. In cases
where over 100 aquatic elves are encountered, they are led into
battle by an 8th-level elf fighter and two 5th-level lieutenants (in
addition to the 3rd- and 4th-level fighters accompanying the
group). More than 160 elves are also accompanied by a 9th-level
fighter and a 6th-level thief. These numbers are all in addition to
the original number of sea elves rolled.

As might be expected, sea elves befriend and employ dolphins.
In any party of at least 20 sea elves, there’s a 50% chance for them
to be accompanied by 1d3 dolphins. These sea mammals are com-
panions; they are neither pets nor cannon fodder. The dolphins
willingly join in combat alongside their elven friends if danger
threatens.

The long-lived sea elves have the time to examine and explore
many different combat tactics and techniques. They master those
deemed most successful. Tactics of the sea elves differ from one
band to another, but common strategies include the following:

A rush, or charge, from directly beneath an opponent. This is
particularly effective against unwanted visitors from the surface,
Elf, Aquatic

 

who are unaccustomed to being attacked from such a direction. If
the attacking elf launched this attack from a bed of seaweed, he
might well escape back into cover before his opponent could re-
act.

A grapple by more than one elf. Sea elves can survive on land
(albeit in a state of growing discomfort) for a few minutes at a
time, while many of their opponents (sharks, for example) can-
not. Several elves may try to grapple an opponent and carry it
onto a beach, well away from the ocean.

Traps. The beds of seaweed and the coral reefs are excellent
staging areas for all manner of spring-propelled booby-traps,
nets, and perhaps some magical entrapments designed and built
by surface elves in return for favors. Ferocious predators have of-
ten decided to turn toward easier prey after encountering a sea elf
band’s defenses.

Habitat/Society: Small communities of 3d100 + 100 normal in-
habitants are the rule of aquatic elven lifestyle. These communi-
ties are often found in heavy weed beds in sheltered waters,
though the aquatic elves may fashion homes in caverns in lagoon
bottoms and coral reefs. Sea elf communities keep in touch with
each other through an elaborate and inefficient custom of wan-
dering herald/messengers who travel from one band to another,
much like postal carriers transmitting oral messages. In each com-
munity, there are several leader-types, as outlined earlier, ruled
over by a fighter of 10th-12th level, with a personal guard of eight
7th-level elf fighters. Naturally, if any elves in the community
carry magical weapons, it would be the leader or one of his
guards.

Aquatic elves are an anti-social race. They avoid air-breathers
as well as other races that dwell beneath the waves. Their cities
are usually carved from the rock beneath beds of seaweeds, prac-
tically invisible to non-elves. A character has the same opportu-
nity to find a sea elf community as he has to detect a secret door.

As independent as the freedom-loving elves are of each others’
communities, they live in even greater isolation from the rest of
the undersea races, whom they would rather not deal with. Al-
though the aquatic elves see nothing wrong with the mermen, the
tritons, and other good-aligned undersea races, the elves see no
reason to involve themselves in the problems of such transitory
peoples. It is part of the elven philosophy to let others go about
their business with a minimum of interruption; aquatic elves
would prefer it if others returned the favor.

Those aquatic elves who are willing to deal with non-elves are
highly insulted if the non-elf expresses any lack of confidence in
the sea elf’s word. An aquatic elf who makes a promise will carry
out his obligation unto death. Should he be killed before he can
succeed, his entire band will work to see that the promise is ful-
filled. On the other hand, aquatic elves do not accept promises
from non-elven characters. The sea elves know that they are the
only race with the honor to carry out the duties of its dead mem-
bers. And, besides, only elves live long enough to guarantee that
they will have the time to fulfill a vow.

Dolphins are one of the few creatures the sea elves genuinely
like. There are 3d6 +2 dolphins swimming about most aquatic elf
bands, providing one of the few clues as to where the elven cities
are located. Aquatic elves are also fairly fond of land elves. It is
uncertain how closely related the two races are, although matings
between land elves and aquatic elves produce elves with the col-
oring of high elves, but with greenish hair. As they have hidden
gill slits that open up when they dive under the surface, these
elves can breathe either air or water indefinitely. The attitudes
and abilities of these half-breeds depend upon whether they were
reared in the forests or the rich kelp beds, with individuals in-
clined (65%) to follow the lifestyles of their mothers.

Sea elves have an outlook on the world that comes from long
lives among quiet natural beauty. Even with magical assistance to

enable them to breathe air, aquatic elves are uncomfortable
above the waves, and so very few have seen the forests that the
high elves speak of with such enthusiasm. But there are few
aquatic elves who would not like to take the impossible trip over-
land to see the wonders of a forest first-hand.

Sea elves hate sahuagin. This isn’t much of a surprise, as almost
every undersea race, with the exception of the perverse ixita-
chitls, hates the sea-devils. But sea elves generate a passion for
conflict with the sahuagin that surprises even themselves.
Aquatic elves leave their sheltered bands in war parties if they
have reason to suspect that sahuagin are dwelling nearby. Should
a party of sea elves encounter sahuagin, the former nearly always
attack if they outnumber their hated foes. Aquatic elves also
make it a point to kill any great sharks in their territory.

Sea elves have no other major enemies, but they dislike
surface-dwelling fishermen, due to the numbers of sea elves
snared in nets, or mistakenly killed as sahuagin by these ignorant
humans.

The sea elves have legends that speak of far-away undersea
elves who have learned to shapechange into sea otters or dol-
phins. There have been search parties motivated by these tales,
but no such elves have been found.

Ecology: Each band of sea elves is self-sufficient, raising their
kelp and hunting fish when necessary.

Sea elves scavenge. They are enchanted by the idea of magic,
but they realize that land elves are more equipped to deal with it.
They often trade rare or decorative items they have found to the
high elves in exchange for metal weapons and tools, which they
cannot forge underwater.

Aquatic elves are valuable sources of information regarding
the lands beneath the sea. Their scavenging parties have uncov-
ered artifacts and tidbits of knowledge from a vast collection of
underwater ruins and sunken ships. Sea elf traders remember the
histories of other races back beyond the imaginings of the current
generation. The trick is to get them to reveal this information.

Malenti

There is a bond between aquatic elves and their hated enemies,
the sahuagin, that neither race openly acknowledges. If sea elves
are present within a mile or so of a sahuagin encampment, then
approximately one out of every hundred sahuagin births resem-
bles the aquatic elves rather than the sea-devils. Most of the time,
these offspring, known as Malenti, are eaten by their parents.
Once in a great while, a Malenti is allowed to live to adulthood
because its physical resemblance to an aquatic elf, in combination
with its sahuagin upbringing and attitudes, make it an ideal spy in
elven communities. Indeed, Malenti often develop the ability to
sense the presence and position of any aquatic elves within 120
feet, an invaluable skill for either a spy or a scout for an invading
sahuagin force.

Few aquatic elves believe in the existence of Malenti, as they
suggest some disturbing possibilities about sahuagin origins.

Malenti do exist, however, and are identical to aquatic elves in
most ways. They age much faster, though, with a life span of only
170 years or so. Although the sea elves themselves have a difficult
time discerning Malenti spies, dolphins might (20%) sense one of
the changelings. Malenti, understandably, aren’t fond of dol-
phins.

It is possible for sahuagin and Malenti to breed, the issue in-
variably being Malenti. In this way, whole sahuagin communities
have vanished, replaced by Malenti. These extraordinarily rare
bands resemble aquatic elves in nearly every way (except life
span, known languages, and other obvious aspects), but they are
just as evil as their sahuagin parents. They often fight in that
style, and they worship the same evil powers as the sahuagin.
Fachan

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Swamps
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Tribal
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: K
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil

NO. APPEARING: 2-12 (4-48)

 

ARMOR CLASS: 5 (Head AC 2)

 

MOVEMENT: 90 (150 Sw)

HIT DICE: 4+2

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 or 2 (bite and weapon)
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4 bite, or by weapon type

 

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Head butt, paralytic bite
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Surprised on a 1
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

 

SIZE: S (2’-4’ tall)
MORALE: Steady (12)
XP VALUE: 650

The fachan is physically one of the Realms’ most unusual crea-
tures. The fachan has one leg, one foot, one arm protruding from
the center of its chest, and one eye in the center of its face. Fachan
skin varies from a dark gray-brown hue to a mottled green, but
the hair of the fachan is always blue-black. Despite these
changes, they also share many physical attributes with ogres and
orcs.

A fachan moves with a hopping gait upon his foot, its six toes
spread equidistantly around the round foot pad for balance. De-
spite initial appearances of an ungainly and awkward body,
fachan are quite agile and fast. They can leap a 10-foot span easi-
ly and can hurtle a 6-foot barrier from a standstill. All fachan can
leap upright and stand erect from a prone position in one seg-
ment.

Combat: Fachan prefer to take enemies by surprise to put imme-
diate fear into their opponents. Fachan are only surprised on a
roll of 1 (1d6) because of fantastically keen hearing. This usually
gives them the opportunity to prepare ambushes and surprises
for their opponents.

A fachan can wield a weapon with his arm except for two-
handed weapons, bow weapons, or pole arms. A fachan gener-
ally wields clubs and flails, though axes and swords are becoming
more common.

Fachan often lay in ambush partially submerged in marshes
and swamps. When an opponent is within 7 feet of the fachan’s
location, it launches itself at its target by its strong, powerful leg.
The fachan has an exceptionally hard skull, and its “head-butt”
attack causes 1-6 points of damage to opponents with Armor
Classes less than 2. In addition, the victim must successfully save
vs. petrification or be stunned each round until a save is success-
ful.

Fachan can wield weapons against their foes, or simply bite
opponents with their rotting, muck-encrusted teeth. The teeth
alone cause 1d3 points of damage, but they can generate a para-
lytic poison (save vs. poison at +2, or be paralyzed for 1d4

 

 

 

 

 

rounds). Once an opponent is downed, the fachan push him un-
der any available water surface to quickly drown their prey.

Habitat/Society: The fachan are shunned by most civilized races
because of their penchant for human and demihuman flesh. The
fachan are cruel beings, more apt to toy with their prey than kill
it quickly and cleanly.

The fachan live in swamps, marshes, and wetlands, their lairs
equivalent to the partially-submerged beaver lodges. Lodges are
constructed in circular patterns. Each clutch has as many as six
lodges. An average tribe contains 30 fachan with approximately
6 lodges for that tribe. The chieftain’s lodge is always at the cen-
ter of the circle, and is the largest of the lodges for that tribe.
Though they average 20 feet in diameter, the fachan lodges are
difficult to locate. The chance of locating a lodge is 10% per
lodge within 50 feet. Rangers have a 15% chance per lodge of
locating one.

Ecology: Fachan have never been found further north than the
swamps west of the Osraun mountains of Turmish, but they are
becoming more common in the swamps near Halruaa and Dur-
par. The largest collection of fachan in the Known Realms is a
eroup of tribes in the Spider Swamps of Calimshan. There are
rumors of even larger numbers and greater varieties of fachan in
Chult or the lands further south across the Great Sea.

The fachan’s legendary leaping ability and dexterity can be
magically rejuvenated from its footpad. Properly treated and en-
chanted, the footpads of two fachan can be made into boots of
striding and springing. The hearing organs of a fachan can be
instrumental in creating potions of clairaudience.

The orcs have a legend that Gruumsh “blessed” the orc races so
they would bear certain offspring that were “half the beings their
parents were yet more than they were as well.” The fachan’s faces
bear striking similarities to depictions of Gruumsh, supporting
the legend. To this end, fachan are sometimes known as
“Gruumsh-kin.”
Feyr

 

 

 

 

 

 

Feyr Great Feyr
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Urban Any
FREQUENCY: Very rare Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Loose band Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night Any
DIET: Emotions Emotions
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5) High (14)
TREASURE: Nil Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil Chaotic evil

NO. APPEARING:

1-4

1

 

 

 

 

ARMOR CLASS: 2 -2

MOVEMENT: 12 12, FI 18 (B)

HIT DICE: 4 16'

THACO: 17 5

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 1-4

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4 2-12/2-12/2-12/
2-12

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Fear Emotion control

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil Invisibility

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 10% 40%

SIZE: S (2’ tall) M (7 tall)

MORALE: Fanatic (18) Fanatic (18)

XP VALUE: 975 11,000

Feyrs (pronounced “fears”) are created from the remnants of or-
dinary nightmares, mixed with residual magical energies, and
unknowingly brought to life by the strong emotions of a large
group of people. They are most commonly found in large cities
that have a good number of mages, priests, and other spell-
casters. Normal feyrs stalk the streets at night, seeking nothing
more than to create havoc. Great feyrs, on the other hand, are
the combination of lesser feyrs, and may be found anywhere,
though they a much rarer than the common feyrs.

Common feyrs appear as humped, hunchbacked creatures,
grim and inhuman in appearance. Their hide is mottled and
warped like the surface of the human brain. The creature is sup-
ported by two main tentacles which act as legs, and by a handful
of other tentacled limbs. Massive horizontal jaws line its under-
side, and the forepart of the beast has 1-5 eyes, usually the color
of melted gold. The feyr’s hide is a sickly rainbow of shades, like
light reflected off an oil slick. There are dull blues and blacks
along the body, pale reds and magentas toward the head, and
deathly greens and yellows along the belly.

Combat: The horizontal jaws of the feyr slung beneath its belly
are the creature’s prime form of attack, inflicting 1d4 points of
damage for common feyrs, 2d6 points for great feyrs. The feyr
does not use its jaws to eat, but rather to strike terror into the
hearts of those who witness its savage and bloody attacks. Those
who witness the attack of either type of feyr must make a success-
ful saving throw vs. spells or be consumed by fear (as the spell of
the same name). This fear acts for 1d4 rounds for common feyrs,
and 2d6 rounds for great feyrs. This form of fear only applies
when the creature attacks. Merely sighting a common feyr does
not inspire fear.

The great feyr has an additional power that can affect the emo-
tions similar to the 4th-level wizard spell emotion. The range of
this attack is 100 yards, may affect a 20-foot by 20-foot area, and
the intended victim must make a successful saving throw vs.
spells at -2 or be affected. Only the negative emotions of fear,
hate, hopelessness, and sadness may be cast by the great feyr.
The great feyr may cast this spell and retain its invisibility.

Common feyrs are slain by direct sunlight, though they have
no fear of it themselves, and do not seek shelter with the coming

 

. Gere WU.

 

 

A eel vy bs
y

Eee, Cee By ee

rr

Wi Ms

 

 

sun, nor hesitate to venture out if they are still alive after sun-up.
Common feyrs can use a saving throw vs. spells against sunlight
created by magic spells, such as continual light, in addition to
their standard magic resistance. Greater feyrs are unaffected by
sunlight.

Habitat/Society: Individual common feyrs are slain by the morn-
ing light. There are occasions when several common feyrs com-
bine to form a great feyr, which in addition to being immune to
the effects of the sun, is much more intelligent. The greater feyr
seeks to inspire even stronger emotions, which it may then use to
stay alive. While common feyrs do not travel far from their point
of origin, great feyrs may undertake long trips, lured by strong
emotional states.

While a common feyr merely slouches through the evening
shadows and fogs, looking for a collection of victims to terrorize
and thereby enrich itself on their emotions, a great feyr chooses
to attack while invisible, playing the emotions of others, height-
ening emotional states already present, and driving mortal be-
ings mad with terror and fear. While the great feyr is not
banished by daylight, it prefers to work at night, and seeks to
retreat into a hidden lair during daylight hours, preferably some
abandoned area such as an old house, cavern, or underground
structure.

Ecology: Common feyrs are created by the emotions of large
masses of people, and great feyrs by compilations of lesser feyrs.
The raw materials for such creatures may be found in any urban
settlement, and when there is additional tension in the air, the
feyrs stalk at night. Cities under siege, towns divided by rivalries
or civil wars, oppressed peoples, and settlements baking under a
merciless summer heat are all possible breeding grounds of feyrs.
Guard and watch units are usually more than sufficient to handle
the common feyrs, as those feyrs attack anything that moves.
But the more dangerous great feyrs must be dealt with by a wiz-
ard or similar high-level individual, who can both withstand the
attack of the feyr and dispatch it.
Firetail

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Lesser Tshala

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any but cold Any but cold
FREQUENCY: Rare Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Flock/ solitary Solitary / flock
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any
DIET: See below See below
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10) Genius (17-18)
TREASURE: Nil Gems only (25%)
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral Chaotic neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1-6 1-2
ARMOR CLASS: 6 2
MOVEMENT: FI15 (B) FI 21 (B)
HIT DICE: 4+4 9+9
THACO: 17 12
NO. OF ATTACKS: 2 4
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6/1-6 1-12/1-12/1-12/

1-12
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Heat Heat, magic use

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil +1 weapon to hit

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 40% 90%

SIZE: S (2' long) S (4' long)
MORALE: Steady (12) Champion (15)
XP VALUE: 1,400 6,000

The nature of this creature has made it a being of awe and legend
in the Realms. The firetail appears as a frolicsome fey creature of
living flame, that loops and darts dazzlingly in the air, bewitch-
those who gaze upon it. Although it is reputed to employ
magic, only the greater firetail, or tshala, actually casts spells.
The two species are outwardly identical. Adventurers who have
encountered both types may be able to recognize the tshala by its
superior flight capabilities.

Combat: Firetails tend to take sides in conflicts, and may wreak
havoc or do much good. They hate salamanders and attack them
on sight. Firetails and fire elementals tend to ignore each other,
for neither race has done anything to deserve the enmity of the
other.

Tshala can use the following spells, cast as though they were
spell casters of the 14th level: plane shift, remove curse, heal,
feeblemind, maze, fire trap (each once per day), and fireball
(once per turn). When spell casting, they can take no other
action, for their entire being is focused upon the spell effects.

Firetails take no damage from heat- and fire-based attacks, but
suffer additional damage from water- and cold-based attacks at
the rate of +3 per die. Sudden strong winds such as the magical
gust of wind can disturb their fiery bodies and prevent them from
spell-casting. Firetails communicate by changing their blaze from
fiery orange to blue-white, and varying the intensity, hue, tem-
perature, and pattern of coloration. Their flames cause 1-6 or 1-
12 points of damage, depending upon their type, upon contact,
and also ignite flammable materials such as parchment and cloth.

Once every three rounds a firetail may blaze intensely for a
few segments so that one of its attacks in that round causes an
additional 1-12 points of damage. Its great heat damages every-
thing within 5 feet that fails a saving throw. If they repeat this
action five times in a day, they must sacrifice one of their spells
for the day.

Habitat/Society: The firetail originated on the Elemental Plane of
Fire, where it is uncommon (tshala are rare), but some have been
transported elsewhere by diverse means, and some have traveled
to other planes of their own whim, for tshala may plane shift
themselves and 1-6 lesser firetails in a group, once per day.

 

 

Such groups are short-lived, for firetails are creatures of whim
and independence. Unfortunately for the lesser firetails, they are
often stranded wherever the tshala abandons them.

Usually solitary, they prefer the company of their own kind to
that of other creatures. Occasionally they may take a compan-
ion, which may be almost any sort of creature. Firetails have ac-
companied others of their own kind, pegasi, sylphs, elves, and
even humans. Although they never forget friends, firetails may
suddenly ignore a familiar being, depart for a time, and return
without good reason. They never allow a friend to be harmed if
they are present. Likewise, they never forget an enemy, and if
they encounter one, do all in their power to ensure that their rival
goes down in flames. Because of their independence and flighty
nature, most other creatures cannot depend on a firetail in times
of need.

Ecology: Although no one knows when or how the first firetail
appeared, their lifestyle and method of reproduction have since
been well-documented by sages and researchers.

Very few firetails actually begin their existence as tshala. Only
1 in 10 start out to be greater firetails, although through age and
experience, a lesser firetail may be promoted to the rank of
tshala.

If a lesser firetail reaches the age of 200 years, it secludes itself
from all other races, and seeks out a source of intense flame and
heat, such as a lava pool or dormant volcano. Once there, it ab-
sorbs tremendous quantities of heat, often draining the nearby
area entirely. This continues for a week, at which point the fire-
tail emerges from the fire as a tshala, with full command of its
abilities.

At some point soon after they reach ancient age (around 400
years), firetails begin accumulating large piles of flammable ma-
terial for their caves. When they have gathered enough to make
1-4 piles burn for several hours, the firetail bursts, setting each
heap afire with intense flame. After an hour has passed, each
mound generates one firetail, with a 10% chance of it being a
tshala.
Frost

TROT AES |

ALINNS |

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Subarctic and cold/winter temperate
forests

FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Tribal

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore

INTELLIGENCE: High

TREASURE: Qx2 each

ALIGNMENT: Neutral good

NO. APPEARING: 1d6

 

ARMOR CLASS:

9 (5 if flying)

 

 

MOVEMENT: 6, 24 fl
HIT DICE: Y (1d4 hp)
THACO: 20

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-2 (dagger)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: _ Spells

SPECIAL DEFENSES:

Invisible at will, immune to cold

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 30%

 

SIZE: T (1’ tall)
MORALE: 12
XP VALUE: 650

Often called snow fairies, snow sprites, or winter folk, these
small, mischievous beings inhabit dense forests, migrating to
cooler regions as the seasons dictate. Frosts are tiny elfin crea-
tures with whirring, beelike wings. Their skin is pale blue,
though some from subarctic regions are a darker blue. Their hair
is white or silvery, their eyes are blue or green, and their clothing
tends to be white with patches of gray, black, blue, and green.

Combat: Frosts, like their cousins the sprites and pixies, are
prone to playing pranks on travelers, but they keep their tricks to
a minimum. “Clever” pranks usually involve shaking snow down
on burly fighters or creating ice patches. Frosts can use control
temperature, 10’ radius at will, at the 10th level of ability.

If evil or destructive beings annoy the frosts, however, they
must be prepared for retaliation. Frosts never attack larger beings
in hand-to-hand combat, but always flee and use their spells at a
distance. They save their weapons skills for hunting small mon-
sters or animals their own size. Initial attacks are made using the
natural environment. For example, if large foes cross ice-covered
lakes or ponds, frosts might use control temperature spells to
cause the ice to crack under their foes’ boots. Then they use spells
to cause the water to refreeze if a being falls through the ice and is
submerged or swimming. If the chance to use an avalanche trap
presents itself, frosts try this against massed groups of their foes.

If this doesn’t work, frosts are able to use cone of cold spells
three times per day at the third level of ability (d4 +3 hp dam-
age, 15-foot-long, 5-foot-wide cone). Each is also able to use ice
hands, a spell-like power that causes 1-2 points of cold damage
by touch, at will. Ice hands freezes up to one gallon of liquid per
round, including potions and holy/unholy water. One frost in six
can cast a cold ray from his hands once per day. This ray is 90 feet
long, an inch wide, and causes 6d4 + 6 points of damage if a sav-
ing throw vs. spells is unsuccessful. No damage is suffered if the
save is successful, as the ray is so narrow.

Frosts are immune to all cold. They take normal damage from
fire- or heat-based spells, and flames causing 1 or more points of
damage instantly sear off their wings, which cannot regrow. Be-

 

 

 

 

 

cause frosts are so light, they suffer only 1-2 points of damage
from falling from any height over 10 feet, but suffer no damage if
they land in a snowbank.

Habitat/Seciety: Frosts are nearly always found in small family
groups, though some gatherings are exploratory bands out to see
the wide world, cause a bit of trouble, or hunt for gems and crys-
tals, which frosts love and hoard. Nomadic in nature, frosts
make their lairs in hollow trees, rocky shelters, old animal dens,
and the like, never staying in one place for more than a year.
Frosts manufacture few things, usually only clothing, though it is
not known how their fine cloth is created. Their dagger-like
weapons are actually hard, sharp icicles.

If carefully approached and given gems, frosts can be very
helpful to well-behaved beings who don’t stay long in the frosts’
woodlands. They like other small woodland fairies best, with
elves and dryads running a close second, halflings third, and ev-
eryone else somewhere far behind. They war continually with
small evil beings such as quicklings. Some frost communities
work closely with elven and fairy bands to defend their woods
against goblins and other invaders, but are also likely to attack
careless human loggers, hunters, and city-builders.

Frosts speak their own language, Elven, and up to three other
languages of allied beings in their vicinity. They cannot read or
write, and have no interest in learning to do so.

Ecology: Frosts have little overall effect on their environment, as
their food and material needs are minute at best. Frosts have no
known use as spell components, though it is rumored that certain
evil sorcerers have investigated this possibility in the past. A few
such sorcerers are known to have had unfortunate and fatal acci-
dents when crossing icy rivers or traveling through dense winter,
forests, and these losses have probably slowed this research.
Gaund

H SPW Y-L4a8h

EATS | Zo
ars INS |

ee |

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Subterranean, hot caverns
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Group
ACTIVE CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivorous
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: Ox4
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1-20

ARMOR CLASS: 6
MOVEMENT: 15

HIT DICE: 4+4

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 4 + special
DAMAGE/ATTACKS: 1-4/1-4/1-6/1-8
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

 

SIZE: M (6' tall)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 650

Gaund are gray-green reptilian creatures with three glowing red
eyes and are often mistaken for large lizards by adventurers.
They are intelligent, but spend most of their time on all fours.
They rise upon their hind legs and balance with their tails only in
combat or when surveying their surroundings. Their skin is
scaled and leathery, and of a somewhat lighter color on the
underside. They communicate in a language of singing clicks and
hollow whistling sounds.

Combat: Gaunds have 90’ infravision, excellent hearing, and
great sensitivity to vibrations. This prevents them from being ef-
fectively blinded by exposure to light or darkness, or by the ob-
scuring effects of smoke or vapors. They are surprised only on a
roll of 1 ona 1d6.

In combat, gaunds do not use weapons of any sort, but leap
about constantly, hurling themselves at and upon opponents,
slashing with their claws (1d4 points of damage), snapping with
their jaws (1d6 points of damage), and using their tails as lashes
or whips (1d8 points of damage). They are fearless, and the death
of a fellow often drives them to fight with even greater ferocity.

If pinned down or caught from the rear, the gaund kicks with
its powerful rear legs for two attacks that cause 3d4 points of
damage. These are the only circumstances in which they use their
rear claws.

The most feared attack of the gaund is the gaze or “ray” attack it
can make with its central eye. This orb is protected by a bony hood
which limits its field of vision so the gaund must aim its head to use
the gaze. The gaze produces a magical effect identical to the 2nd-
level clerical heat metal spell upon any one opponent or object
within a range of 90 feet. This gaze can be used against one crea-
ture per round and is in addition to its normal attacks. The ray
attack can be countered by any means effective against the spell.

Gaund suffer no damage at all from heat or normal fire, even
dragon turtle steam. Magical fire attacks inflict less damage upon
them, causing 2 points of damage per die, with a minimum of 1
point of damage per die. However, they are especially susceptible
to cold-based attacks (+2 to each die of damage). They are also
susceptible to sonic attacks and make saving throws against them
at a penalty of -2.

Habiiai/Seciety: Gaunds live in groups of up to twenty members,
although large colonies of many groups have sometimes been

 

 

 

 

 

found. They live in dry, fiery caverns, and are only rarely en-
countered in cool climates or above ground.

Gaunds are omnivorous. Although they do not build, use
tools, or seem to have any type of social structure, they do hus-
band food carefully, often maintaining breeding colonies of lesser
animals to ensure themselves of a plentiful supply.

Gaund mating rituals include an upright, shuffling, head-to-
head dance during which an an egg-bearing female turns a fiery
orange. After a gestation period of about four months, 1-4 eggs
are produced. These have leathery shells and are covered with a
clear, spicy-scented slime. This substance is known to neutralize
nearly all acids and, if smeared on a flammable item increases its
saving throw vs. fire by a bonus of +3.

Gaunds guard their eggs ferociously for the 3-12 days it takes
them to hatch. The young are small (2+4 Hit Dice), and do not
develop the gaze attack until they reach maturity 3 to 6 months
later.

Gaunds hoard gems and pretty stones of all types, and have
been known to trade these for food with adventuring parties too
strong for them to overcome. Generally, however, they seem
both hostile toward intruders and territorial. Their lands should
not be entered casually.

Ecology: Gaunds live a very simple and naturalistic life, so basic
that they are often mistaken for nonintelligent, dangerous liz-
ards. They are hunted for their hard and durable teeth by hu-
manoids who live nearby. Tools and daggers fashioned from this
material dull easily but do not easily split or shatter. Gaund tails
are highly valued for their rich, succulent meat, which does not
readily spoil.

Prost Gaund: This gaund variation lives only in very cold regions.
Its color is bluish-gray or slate-gray. Its eyes are a glowing blue. Its
ray has the effect of chill metal, as the 2nd-level clerical spell. The
creature resists cold-based attacks and is susceptible to fire-based
attacks. Its eggs are encased in a slime that protects them from ex-
treme cold. It is otherwise identical to the normal gaund.
Giant, Mountain

i ae FF - Tae Y a

ATG
BALIN)

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any/ Mountains
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Family
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: E

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1-4

ARMOR CLASS: 4

MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 15+3

THACO: 9

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-8 or by weapon (4d10 + 10)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Hurling rocks for 2-20
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: H (14’ tall)
MORALE: Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: Normal: 7,000

Infant: Nil
Juvenile: 3,000
Shaman: 8,000
Shaman, 3rd: 9,000

Mountain giants are huge humanoids that live in remote moun-
tain caverns.

Standing 14 feet tall and weighing 2,000 pounds, mountain gi-
ants are impressive foes. They greatly resemble large hill giants.
Their skin color is a light tan to reddish brown with straight black
hair. The males have heavy beards but no mustaches, and they
have large pot bellies. They are typically clothed in rough hides
or skins and carry huge clubs as weapons. The stale reek of a
mountain giant can be detected several hundred feet downwind.

Combat: Mountain giants always attack in a straight-forward
manner, not by ambush or deceit. They love to get into a high,
unassailable spot with lots of boulders. When in such a position,
mountain giants rarely take cover, but stand in the open to fling
their missiles. They can hurl boulders down on their opponents
for 2d10 points of damage each. They can catch similar missiles
30% of the time.

In melee they use huge clubs that cause 4d10+10 points of
damage, including their Strength bonus. These clubs are usually
just large tree limbs or logs. They usually keep several such weap-
ons around. Mountain giants are as strong as fire giants (22).

A mountain giant can summon and control other monsters.
This summoning takes a full turn to perform and 1d6 hours pass
before the creatures appear. A summoning results in either
1d10+5 ogres (70%), 1d6+3 trolls (20%), or 1d4 hill giants
(10%), although the giant has no idea in advance of what he will
get. The control is very loose, not absolute domination. The
mountain giant can give a broadly defined command and the
monsters obey as they see fit. The summoned monsters stay with
and fight for the mountain giant, but they value their own lives
over that of the giant. The summoned creatures stay with the gi-
ant until killed, sent away, or another summoning is made.

Habitat/Society: The home of a family of mountain giants is of-
ten in a large rock cavern in a mountain. Frequently there are un-

 

 

 

 

 

 

explored passages leading out of the giants’ home. They rarely
have any interest in anything beyond their cavern. There is a 75%
chance of summoned creatures acting as guards and underlings in
the cavern.

The females and young are rarely seen, since they stick close to
the cavern. Mountain giants are polygamous, usually one female
living with several males. Three quarters of the young are male,
which accounts for their low population. If two or more moun-
tain giants are in a lair, there is a 50% chance of a female anda
25% chance of a child. Roll 1d4 to determine the age of the child.
If it is a 4, it is a helpless infant or small child. A roll of 1-3 indi-
cates older children or teens that have the Hit Dice, damage, and
attack rolls of hill giants.

There is a 20% chance that one of the giants in a family is a sha-
man. Roll 1d6 to determine the level of spell use, 1-4 meaning 1st
level, 5-6 indicating 2nd level. This shaman can cast from the
spheres of All, Animal, Charm, Combat, Elemental, and Heal-
ing. He has an innate ability to find caves and cavern entrances
within half a mile, unless these are magically hidden.

While only one family is found in a given lair, several families
make up a loose tribe scattered over a mountain or range. Each
tribe has a 3rd-level shaman as its leader. He presides over the ex-
tremely rare gatherings of the tribe and counsels those willing to
travel to talk to him. The shaman always lives with a group of
summoned monsters, but never with other mountain giants.

Ecology: Mountain giants are foragers and hunters. Their fa-
vorite food is mountain sheep. They also eat nuts, tubers, and
other edible mountain plants. Nothing hunts mountain giants,
but sometimes they pick the wrong cave in which to set up house-
keeping. Since they tend not to fully explore all the back tunnels,
nasty things from underground have been known to attack and
devour sleeping giants.

Since these giants are neither good nor evil, it is possible to set
up peaceful relations with them. However, they are suspicious of
and reluctant to deal with outsiders.
Gloomwing

ane

 

 

 

 

 

Flying Serpent Moth

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any Any, Demi Plane
Of Shadow

FREQUENCY: Rare Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary or flock Solitary
ACTIVE TIME: Any Night /darkness
DIET: Carnivore Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: High (13-14) Animal (1)
TREASURE: Any (usually A) Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1-4 1

 

ARMOR CLASS:

6 1
4F121(MCB) 2FI18 (MCD)

 

 

MOVEMENT:

HIT DICE: 34+3 5+1
THACO: 17 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-5 1-3/1-3/1-8
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Venom Pheromone
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Darkness Confusion
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 40% Standard

 

SIZE: L (' wingspan) M (8' wingspan)
MORALE: Steady (11-12) Average (8-10)
XP VALUE: 975 1,400

The name “gloomwing” describes two entirely different monsters
with similar habits but radically different appearances and na-
tures. One type of gloomwing is a fey creature which makes its
home on the Prime Material Plane. These monsters resemble
huge serpents with large, bat-like wings. They have smooth,
scaly bodies and lightly-furred wings. Their overall color is a lus-
terless black, with a dusty cinnamon brown on the nose, tail, and
wingtips. Some specimens are brown all over. All of these
winged serpents have glittering amber eyes which glow a baneful
red when the creature is enraged or feeding.

Combat: Gloomwings can generate darkness, 15 radius (as the
2nd-level wizard spell) at will as a 4th-level spell caster. They
have excellent sight and superior infravision, 180-foot range.
Their other senses are extremely keen and allow them to locate
and attack opponents even in magical darkness. Gloomwings are
wise enough to avoid powerful creatures and large parties of ad-
venturers. However, they are quick to attack when they think
they have the advantage. They prefer to swoop to attack from
behind, hiding in their own darkness. Gloomwings also use dark-
ness to travel or hunt without detection on moonless nights, and
to foil missile fire.

A gloomwing’s venomous bite is its most feared weapon. The
bite causes a -1 penalty on each save vs. poison. If the save is
not successful, one of the following effects occurs (roll d%):

01-40: Victim flees in fear (as 4th-level wizard spell) for four
rounds.

41-75: Victim of less than 8 + 1 Hit Dice (or 8 levels) falls into a
catatonic slumber and cannot be awakened for 2d4 turns.
Creatures of 8 +2 Hit Dice (or 9 levels) or more are unaf-
fected. Such victims are treated as if they have made their
saving throws (see below).

76-85: Victim is stunned for 1d6 rounds. While stunned, victim
cannot use Dexterity bonuses to Armor Class, attack,
cast spells, communicate, or perform any actions except
normal movement or dropping items held in the hands.

 

 

 

 

87-95: Victim is confused (as the 4th-level wizard spell) for six
rounds.

96-97: Victim is feebleminded (as the 5th-level wizard spell).
Victims who are not spell casters are treated as if they
have made their saving throws.

98-00: Victim suffers double damage (4-10) from the bite and
suffers wracking pains and convulsions which render him
helpless for one round.

An opponent can suffer from only one of these effects during a
single encounter with one or more gloomwings. Unaffected op-
ponents must successfully save vs. poison each time they are bit-
ten, but once a save fails and the victim suffers from a listed
affect, all subsequent bites during the encounter inflict only half
damage. Gloomwings engage in long melees with opponents who
have survived the venom’s affects often retreat, only to return
1d3 hours later to launch a “new” assault. Gloomwings are im-
mune to gloomwing venom.

Habitat/Society: Gloomwings are thought to serve dark powers
(evil priests, dragons, etc.) as messengers, steeds, and spies. A
gloomwing can carry 175 pounds and still fly at full speed. They
can maintain a flight speed of 14 (MC C) with loads between 175
and 255 pounds, and are grounded if forced to carry loads
greater than 255 pounds. Gloomwings prefer to make their lairs
in caves set high into the faces of inaccessible cliffs or in ancient
ruins. They horde treasure to use as bribes or to purchase serv-
ices from lesser creatures. These hordes are always well hidden
and frequently trapped to prevent theft. Gloomwings can speak
the Common tongue and Orc, though with a rasping, hissing
voice. They speak the tongue of evil dragons quite well.

Ecology: A gloomwing eats any creature it can overcome, and
eats carrion if necessary. They always seek alliances with any
evil creatures living nearby. They seek to become the masters if
their neighbors are weaker, or well-paid servants if the neigh-
bors are stronger. In either case, gloomwings are not known for
Gloomwing

 

fidelity or loyalty.

Gloomwing Moth: The other monster commonly called “gloom-
wing” is the adult stage of the tenebrous worm (see Monstrous
Compendium Volume II). These huge moths are native to the
demi-plane of Shadow. Their bodies and wings are covered with
shimmering, geometric patterns of black and silver. The have
large, fern-like black antennae tipped with white and eight legs
each ending in a pearly claw.

A gloomwing’s shimmering markings make it a difficult target.
Any creature viewing the moth squarely from above or below
must successfully save vs. spells or be confused, as the 4th-level
wizard spell, for 1d4 +4 rounds. The markings also provide ex-
cellent camouflage, and the moth is 50% undetectable in dark-
ness, twilight, or moonlight. Successfully camouflaged
gloomwings cannot cause confusion. When attacking in darkness
or near darkness, a gloomwing receives a -2 bonus to its sur-
prise roll. Gloomwings normally swoop to the attack. This gives
them a + 2 attack bonus and allows them to seize and carry away
victims less than three feet tall and that weigh less than 61
pounds. Such victims are securely held in the moth's eight claws
while the moth attacks each round with a +4 attack bonus and a
+2 bonus to damage.

When fighting creatures too large to carry away, the moth
hovers, biting and flailing with its two front claws. During the
second and each successive round of such combat, the moth
emits a potent pheromone that can attract other gloomwings and
can cause weakness in any non-insect. There is a 20% chance

each round that 1d4 additional gloomwings arrive at the end of
any round when one or more gloomwings are emitting the scent.
The weakness effect has a 25-foot radius and exposed creatures
must successfully save vs. poison or lose one point of Strength
each round they remain in the area of effect. Creatures who are
successful with their initial saves need not save again if exposure
continues. Multiple gloomwings do not require multiple saves.
Lost Strength points are recovered at the rate of one per turn,
beginning 1d4 hours after exposure stops. Creatures reduced to
zero Strength lose consciousness until they regain at least one
point of Strength.

Habitat/Society: Gloomwing moths are short-lived, solitary
hunters. They use a variety of pheromones to ward off rivals and
to find mates. They form groups only to attack large prey, and
then only when drawn to the fray by the combat pheromone.
When two gloomwings of the same sex meet they flee unless there
is combat pheromone in the air.

Ecology: Gloomwing moths live only 4-9 (1d6 + 3) weeks. During
this time they search for mates and eat voraciously. Egg-laden
females (2 chance) use corpses of small size or larger as incuba-
tors for their eggs. The eggs hatch in 12 days, sprouting 4-10
small tenebrous worms. The corpse cannot be resurrected unless
the infestation is removed with a cure disease spell. Unless killed,
the young worms completely devour the body when they
emerge.
Golden Ammonite

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Oceanic canyons over 1,000' deep
FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Scavenger

INTELLIGENCE: Semi

TREASURE: Special

ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1-3

 

ARMOR CLASS: 6 (shell), 8 (arms/head)

 

MOVEMENT: 1

HIT DICE: 8+3

THACO: 11

NO. OF ATTACKS: 10
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4 each tentacle

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Blinding, draining

 

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Immune to psionic attack, telepathy,
ESP, and all enchantment/charm

spells; takes half damage from blunt
weapons and cold-based attacks; can

regenerate; cannot be surprised in its

 

environment
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 90%
SIZE: L (6’ shell, 8’-12’ tentacles)
MORALE: 10
XP VALUE: 8,000

In oceanic abysses, where light never penetrates, lives a species of
large-shelled mollusk that feeds upon the debris and minerals on
the sea floor. Gold is extracted from the sludgy silt of the ocean
floors that this monster consumes. This metal is then deposited
on the creature’s shell, creating an eerily beautiful coiled wonder
that gives this beast its name, the golden ammonite. The exposed
parts of the golden ammonite’s soft body are dark brown with
spots of black. The shell is, of course, brilliant, pure gold.

Combat: Each of these monsters has two fist-sized, multifaceted
eyes that project on stalks just beyond the rim of its shell. These
eyes are not especially remarkable in power, as they are very
nearsighted and work best when a lighted object is within 30 feet,
though they can detect light and heat sources to 120 feet. The
creature’s skin, however, is fantastically pressure sensitive, so
any sound or motion within 600 feet of it is instantly detected,
ruling out all surprise even if an approaching being is magically
silenced. Blinding this creature with light spells is very easy, but
as a tactic it is useless, as the creature can “see” its environment
far better with its skin’s “sonar sense,” which is obviously not hin-
dered by such spells.

Any being approaching within 90 feet of this monster is made
the focus of a light ball attack. Each eye independently launches a
small globe of magical light, 1 foot in diameter, at its chosen tar-
get, usually targeting the largest creature in a group first. A vic-
tim must make a successful saving throw vs. spells against the
light ball or be struck in the face by the magically guided missile.
An abyssal creature with eyes is instantly blinded and will flee
this attack. A surface dweller suffers a -4 penalty on all attacks,
and is also effectively blinded by the light in his eyes. Two victims
may be attacked each round, at will. A dispel magic spell can
remove this effect if it is successfully cast against 8th-level magic.
If the victim is blinded for longer than 12 turns, however, his eye-
sight is permanently damaged and a wish, heal, or cure blindness
spell is required to cure the -2 attack penalty he suffers when the
light ball is removed.

If beings come within grappling range, the golden ammonite
lashes out with its tentacles at up to 10 opponents. Each tentacle
can cause 1-4 points of damage by constriction, but suckers on
each tentacle also begin to draw out the vital fluids in the victim’s
body. The draining damage caused per round by each tentacle is
equal to the victim’s Armor Class, not counting Dexterity or
shield bonuses, as a measure of how many suckers can be fixed to
the victim’s skin. Thus, a constricted man in chain mail armor
receives 1d4 +5 points of damage per round. Constricting tenta-
cles need not roll to attack in subsequent rounds. Victims can
attempt to escape only if their die roll is equal to or better than
their chances to bend bars/lift gates, as per their Strength. One
roll is allowed each round. A successful Strength roll to open
doors allows a trapped victim to free his arms and weapons and
strike out, though with a -2 attack penalty.

Unintelligent or nondiscriminating beings in combat with a
golden ammonite have a 50% chance with each attack to strike at
the Armor Class 6 shell instead of the Armor Class 8 body. Intel-
ligent, discriminating beings can attack only the soft part of its
body, but any miss must be rerolled against Armor Class 6 to see
if the shell was struck instead, reducing its value. Any roll of four
or more higher than the score needed to hit may be directed by an
intelligent opponent at one of the golden ammonite’s two eyes,
which are destroyed instantly by any amount of damage. The
creature withdraws into its shell immediately if it loses an eye,
staying put for hours while it regenerates all of its damage.

Because of its soft, elastic body, this creature takes half damage
from non-edged weapons. Many weapons cannot be used under-
water anyway because of physical constraints. Any weapons
that strike the shell of the golden ammonite have part of their
impact absorbed, and cause only half damage (with fractions
rounded down) in this case as well. Thus, a blunt weapon used
on its shell causes only one-quarter damage. In addition, the
creature is partially adapted to cold and receives only half dam-
age from cold-based attacks. It regenerates damage to its soft
body at a rate of 1 hit point per turn. Shell damage can be re-
grown in 7-12 months.

The golden ammonite’s shell is valued at 50,000-80,000 gold
pieces by the wealthiest surface-dwelling buyers, and some
undersea races see them as priceless. Each point of damage in-
flicted on a shell reduces this overall value by 1,000 gold pieces,
to a minimum value of 10,000 gold pieces, which would essen-
tially be a smashed shell. A golden shell weighs about 1,000
pounds, regardless of its condition.

Habitat/Society: Golden ammonites have adapted to the crush-
ing darkness of the bottoms of great marine trenches, where sav-
age, ghastly monsters are rumored to live. Little is known of
these dangerous regions, into which it is said even sahuagin fear
to venture. If golden ammonites have anything resembling a soci-
ety among them, it has yet to be discovered. So alien are their
thought patterns that telepathy and ESP are useless in communi-
cating with them, and produce only confused and frightening im-
ages. Psionic attack and spells that affect the mind are similarly
rendered worthless. Sages guess that they might have a language
based on touch, sound waves, or some other medium, but no
proof of this exists.

Golden ammonites collect no treasure or property, and they
manufacture no known items. The shells of these beings have
never been found empty on the ocean floor. No young have ever
been seen. Their lifespans are probably very long, perhaps in the
hundreds of years.

Ecology: Aside from consuming the carcasses of dead creatures
and sea-floor debris, the effect that the golden ammonite has on
its environment and neighbors has yet to be unveiled.
Golem, Lightning

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any land
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Semi (2-4)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1
ARMOR CLASS: 0
MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 11 (66 hp)
THACO: 9

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 4-32

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

 

 

SIZE: L (8' tall)
MORALE: Fearless (20)
XP VALUE: 2,004

The lightning golem is an artificial being given animation, if not
true life, by the infusion of an elemental spirit. It is created and
controlled by powerful magics or with the aid of a Manual of
Golem Construction (see the Dungeon Master’s Guide). Like oth-
er magically animated creations it is often employed as a guard
or ward by those powerful enough to fashion them.

Lightning golems are physically fairly simple. Their bodies are
nothing more than a gold framework that is roughly humanoid
in shape. The limbs of the creature are articulated, giving it the
ability to move its arms and legs in much the same way that a
man might. In fact, the “skeleton” of the creature has been lik-
ened to a mannequin or doll such as might be used by an artist in
place of a model. What makes the construction unusual is the
aura of electricity that constantly dances around it. Because of
the energies used to empower the creature, it is alive with brush
discharges, arcs of electricity, and a general haze of St. Elmo’s
fire. The shape of this aura is surprisingly man-like.

Lightning golems cannot speak, but obey simple commands
given them by their creators. Their understanding is limited,
however, making complex tasks beyond them.

Combat: The lightning golem moves much more quickly than
one might expect an automaton to move. Because of this, it gains
a +2 bonus to all initiative rolls that it is called upon to make.

When in close combat, the lightning golem lashes out with its
metallic arms, trying to strike its enemies. Anyone hit by the be-
ing suffers 4d8 points of damage from the blow and its associated
electrical shock. Anyone making a successful saving throw vs.
spells or with some immunity to electrical damage suffers only
half damage. Persons who fail their saves may be required (at the
DM's option) to make saving throws for some or all of the items
they are carrying.

If possible, the golem begins combat by unleashing a powerful
stroke of chain lightning at its enemies. This attack is similar to
that of the sixth-level wizard spell of the same name and has a

Raceg.

,

 

range of 50 yards. The stroke inflicts 6d6 points of damage to the
first target that it strikes.

Because of the inorganic nature of this being, the lightning
golem is immune to all manner of life affecting magic or psionic
powers. Thus, attempts to put it to sleep or cause disease fail.
Spells and powers that influence the mind are similarly useless
against this automaton. Attacks that depend upon heat or fire
affect the golem normally, causing its golden skeleton to melt
and deform. Those based on cold, ice, lightning, or electricity
are ineffective. Spells and abilities that have power over metal,
such as crystalbrittle, have their normal effects upon the light-
ning golem.

Lightning golems are considered greater golems, and are thus
always under the control of their creator.

Habitat/Society: Because the lightning golem is an automaton, it
has no society to speak of. From time to time, a truly powerful
individual may assemble more than one of these beings, but go-
lems do not have any social order or customs.

Ecology: The creation of a lightning golem is a task beyond any
but a wizard of 18th level or higher. The labor begins with the
manufacture of the construct’s golden body from 2,000 pounds of
gold. The gold itself, and the materials needed to fashion it into
its new form, cost 150,000 gold pieces. The construction of the
body requires 10 weeks. Once the body is completed, the en-
chanting can begin. This must be attempted in an open area dur-
ing the height of a tremendous thunderstorm. When the storm
reaches its peak, the wizard must cast a wish, permanency, chain
lightning, enchant an item, and geas spell. As soon as the final
spell is cast, a bolt of lightning is attracted to the body, striking it
and infusing it with tremendous power.

Manuals of Lightning Golems construction exist, but such
tomes are very rare. There is a 10% chance that any Manual of
Iron Golems is actually a Manual of Lightning Golems.
Hamadryad

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate, subtropical/forest
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Water and sunlight
INTELLIGENCE: High (13-14)
TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1-2

ARMOR CLASS: 7

MOVEMENT: 15

HIT DICE: 4

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-3 (pummel)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 75%

 

SIZE: M (5-54 tall)
MORALE: Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 650

These woodland spirits appear to be beautiful elven or human
females, except that they have deep, sparkling, green eyes and
long green hair. They are peaceful, quick-witted, and polite, but
shy. They rarely speak to humans and their ilk. Like their cousins
the dryads, each hamadryad is linked to an individual oak tree;
however, a hamadryad can leave the vicinity of her tree.

Coxurbat: Hamadryads often carry knives, daggers, or similar
weapons, but they shun physical combat and prefer to use their
magical abilities instead. Hamadryads can cast hold plant once a
day and charm person three times a day (saving throw has a -3
penalty) as casters at the 11th level of ability. Hamadryads can
use, at will, speak with plants, animal friendship, entangle, pass
without trace, dimension door (from tree to tree only, maximum
range 660 yards), and quench fire (as the reverse of the 7th-level
priest spell fire storm) as casters of the 11th level of ability.

Hamadryads always successfully detect snares and pits and
cannot be entangled. A hamadryad can automatically discern the
nature of magically-created trees or vegetation such as those gen-
erated by massmorph, tree, or hallucinatory forest spells. They
recognize treants and treant-controlled trees on sight. They can
enter any living tree using the 6th-level priest spell transport via
plants, and remain there as long as they wish. If a hamadryad
enters a tree containing a spell caster that is using a plant door,
pass plant, or transport via plants spell, there always is room in
the tree for the hamadryad and she can attempt to charm the spell
caster. The saving throw vs. this charm has a -6 penalty. These
special charms can be used at will and in addition to the hama-
dryad’s three charm person spells each day. The special charm
even works on druids of 7th level or higher.

Hamadryads are immune to the effects of the call woodland
beings spell, but are aware of the spell if they are in its area of
effect. Usually (90%) they travel to the caster’s location to ob-
serve. If the caster’s goals are not contrary to the hamadryad’s,
she serves of her own free will. Hamadryads who are expecting
trouble usually gather a cadre of charmed people and friendly
animals. While these allies fight, the hamadryad dimension
doors from tree to tree, using entangle and charm to disorganize
and demoralize foes.

Habitaf/Sociery: Hamadryads are found only in ancient, vast
forests far from civilization. They dislike non-forest environ-

 

 

 

ments and almost never willingly leave the woodlands.

Hamadryads speak the languages of dryads, elves, pixies,
sprites, and sometimes (33%) Common, which they learn from
charmed victims. A hamadryad also is 90% likely to speak the
languages of centaurs, fauns, treants, and the druids.

Hamadryads seldom argue with other woodland creatures.
They are fond of dryads and treants and always are on good
terms with them. Frequently they use their quench fire ability to
aid these creatures. They give all treasure they find to their dryad
friends for safe keeping. They are uncomfortable leaving treasure
in their unguarded trees as they do not wish to encourage greedy
beings to chop down large trees in search of wealth. On the other
hand, hamadryads know most treasures are eventually found no
matter how well hidden and that an item in a dryad’s possession
cannot be used to hurt the forest.

Like dryads, hamadryads are attracted to comely males. How-
ever, they are not possessive of males who succumb to their
charm abilities. They take charmed victims deep into the forest
where the victim is compelled to perform some service, usually
protecting the trees from woodcutters and the like. When the
service is complete, the hamadryad releases the victim near a
dryad’s tree, where the victim might be charmed again. If not, the
victim is free to leave the forest.

Eealogy: Hamadryads do not eat. They get all the nourishment
they need from sunlight, through the chlorophyll in their hair,
and from the water they drink. They prefer fresh water from
springs or wells, but can survive on water that has been fouled by
human or animal wastes. A hamadryad who is imprisoned in-
doors will die of starvation in 10-20 days unless given access to
sunlight for at least one hour a day. A hamadryad shorn of her
hair starves unless she is allowed to regrow her hair.

A hamadryad’s tree is always huge and old, but does not radi-
ate magic or show other signs of its true nature, though careful
questioning with a speak with plants spell probably will reveal
the tree for what it is.
Harrier

eh
FORGOTTEN REALINS
~~ ee

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Harrier Larvae
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Jungle Jungle
FREQUENCY: Very rare Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary Nest
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night Night
DIET: Carnivore Carnivore

(carrion) (carrion)
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7) Non (0)
TREASURE: Nil Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil Evil
NO. APPEARING: 1-2 25
ARMOR CLASS: 6 9
MOVEMENT: 3, gliding 12 1
HIT DICE: 7+7 1
THACO: 13 19
NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-5/2-5/2-12 1-6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Poison, rear claws’ Nil

2-5 each
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Camouflage, Nil

spell immunity
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil Nil
SIZE: M (4' long) T (1'-2' long)
MORALE: Fanatic (18) Fearless (20)
XP VALUE: 4,000 35

Harriers appear basically humanoid. They have two arms, two
legs, and one head. They have somewhat pointed ears, glowing
red eyes, and vicious beaks with sharp needle-like teeth spaced
around the edges. Their beaks and their leathery skin are mottled
green in color. They have no hair.

A thin membrane stretches between arm and body, ending at
the knee. Their hands and feet have sharp claws, which are used
for climbing trees as well as for combat. Using their arm-
membranes as rudimentary wings, harriers glide from treetops to
attack their prey. These foul creatures fortunately inhabit only
the hottest jungle environments.

Combat: When motionless and against a background of green
jungle foliage, harriers blend in well. In this case, opponents
receive a -2 penalty to surprise rolls. Harriers attack by swoop-
ing quickly toward opponents and using their claws and beak. A
beak hit has a 25% chance to inject a burning poison. This poison
causes an additional 2-12 points of damage for one round. The
pain results in the victim attacking with a -2 penalty. While the
poison is in effect, Dexterity adjustments to Armor Class no
longer apply. A saving throw reduces the damage to half and
eliminates most pain effects, reducing the victim’s attack penalty
to -1. The effects of the poison last for 5-20 rounds after it is
injected.

If a harrier hits with both its front claws, it attaches itself to its
victim, and brings its rear claws to bear. Each rear claw causes 2-
5 points of damage with a successful hit. Once the harrier has
attached itself to a victim, it becomes difficult to dislodge, requir-
ing the victim to make a successful Strength check to do so.
While attached, the harrier automatically causes 1-3 points of
damage per front claw per round. It addition, it receives a +2
bonus to attacks when it uses its beak and rear claws on a victim
to which it is attached.

Dislodging the creature causes 2-5 points of damage per front
claw. This damage applies even after the creature is killed, unless

 

 

 

 

 

the victim spends one full round to remove each claw.
A harrier is immune to heat and fire-based spells.

Habitat/Society: Harriers have no formal society, meeting only
for short periods for courtship rituals and mating. A female har-
rier lays 2-8 eggs about three weeks after mating. She digs shal-
low pits for nests, dividing the eggs into two or three groups
located several feet apart. Predators, including adult harriers,
prevent most of the eggs from hatching into larvae. A month af-
ter the eggs are laid, 2-5 larvae hatch and begin to forage on their
own. Only 1-2 live to mature into harriers.

Ecology: The harrier is a vicious predator that attacks any living
animal it sees, including large and aggressive creatures such as
dragons. When live prey is scarce, they scavenge for food, eating
any type of carrion, including their own dead. They have no nat-
ural predators, but have several enemies in the jungle.

A harrier egg could bring up to 1,000 gold pieces from the right
buyer. A young harrier can be trained to recognize a master who
feeds it during its larval stage. To fully train the creature and be-
come recognizable to it, the master must spend at least an hour
each day with the creature as it matures. Because parental care is
not natural for the harrier, however, a harrier cannot be trained
to do anything except recognize its master. Even then, the harrier
is dangerous and somewhat unpredictable. Once it has been
placed somewhere as a guard animal, it guards that area to its
death.

Larvae: Harrier larvae are small, worm-like creatures with a
transluscent, mottled brown skin. They hatch with a well-
developed, toothless beak, which grows and develops as the lar-
va does. A nearly mature larva has limbs and other organs
visible just under its skin. The larva matures rapidly if enough
food is available, shedding its skin after two months and emerg-
ing as a small, but fully-developed harrier.
tlarria

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any urban area
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Life energy
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 0
MOVEMENT: Fl 15 (A)

HIT DICE: 4+3

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 0
DAMAGE/ATTACK: Nil

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Emotion control
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (6’ tall)
MORALE: Fearless (20)
XP VALUE: 5,000

 

Every culture has reports of unusual behavior by otherwise nor-
mal people. Perhaps a wife who has been true and faithful for
many years suddenly seeks passion in the arms of a stranger.
Maybe a man who has been good and kind his entire life sudden-
ly lashes out and kills several of his best friends. Sometimes this
sudden change is the result of natural psychological stress or
madness, but often it is the work of the dreaded harrla.

The harrla is naturally and permanently invisible. Those capa-
ble of sensing invisible objects see it as a humanoid figure, the
height of a man. Its edges shimmer and fluctuate, making it im-
possible to determine if the form is a man or a woman.

The harrla has no known language, and seems unable to com-
municate. Some scholars say that a harrla can communicate with
others of its kind, but there is certainly no proof of this. As they
are almost never encountered in pairs or groups, however, lan-
guage is all but unnecessary for them.

Combat: The harrla does not enter physical combat the way that
many creatures do. It has no capacity to inflict physical damage
and takes whatever steps it must to avoid placing itself in danger
of physical or mystical assault. Of course, it is aware that most
material weapons and spells cannot harm it, so its judgment is
affected by these considerations.

The main “attack” mode of the harrla is its ability to infuse a
living creature with an overpowering emotion. Each harrla is
able to project only a single emotion. Although there are, in the-
ory, as many types of harrla as there are emotional states, some
common examples include hate, passion, and fear.

Hate: This type of harrla is capable of inducing hate in its vic-
tims that causes them to be overwhelmed with the desire to kill
and destroy. While they do not simply attack anyone that they
see, the slightest provocation results in a violent outburst. Thus,
someone at the breakfast table might go into a killing frenzy
upon finding that his meal was improperly prepared.

Passion: Those infused with passion find themselves unable to
control their romantic desires. They fall into the arms of the
nearest person of the appropriate sex and behave in a most wan-

 

 

 

 

 

ton manner. The effects of this infusion are similar to those of the
philter of love, only more intense and of shorter duration.

Fear: Persons overcome with fear flee from anything that
presents itself to them in a frightening manner. Because the vic-
tims lose control of basic common sense, however, even persons
reaching out to or walking toward the characters will take on
menacing overtones.

The harrla is naturally drawn to those who are struggling to
keep the emotion that it generates in check. Once it finds such
persons, it begins to stimulate the emotional centers of the vic-
tims’ subconscious minds. Within a few seconds, the victims be-
come consumed by the false emotions of the harrla and act
purely according to their new emotional state. While in this con-
dition, the characters are under the control of the Dungeon Mas-
ter, just as if they were NPCs.

The victims have no memory of what they have done while
under the influence of the harrla and are often shocked to learn
what has transpired during the missing minutes of their life. The
harrla’s influence remains for 30 minutes, minus 1 minute per
point of the victim’s Wisdom score. A saving throw vs. spells is
permitted to avoid the influences of this creature, with success
indicating that the victims are safe for 24 hours. This save is per-
mitted only when the harrla first attempts to dominate an indi-
vidual.

Those under the influence of the harrla can be freed by a magi-
cal spell that counters the emotional effect of the creature. Thus,
someone who was under the influence of a harrla that projected
mindless happiness could be released by the casting of an emo-
tion spell that induced sadness.

It is also possible to break the power of the creature through
forceful persuasion and Charisma. In order for characters to
drive out the influence of the harrla they must be a true and trust-
ed friend of the dominated character. If this is the case, the indi-
viduals must try to convince the victims that things are not as
they perceive them. The chance of this working is 1% per Cha-
risma point of the person trying to break the enchantment.

Persons under the emotional influence of a harrla lose 1 point
Harrla

 

of Charisma. This loss is permanent, remaining even after the
victims throw off the effects of the harrla’s emotion controlling
power. When the victims’ Charisma scores are reduced to 0, the
victims lose all vitality and will to live, dying in 1-6 rounds. Only
restoring lost Charisma points prevents death.

When a harrla is dominating a specific person, it cannot travel
more than 75 feet away from him. The creature retains its natural
ability to fly, however, and often drifts above him as he moves
through crowds and the like.

As an example of the harrla’s dark and evil power, consider the
following situation. A cleric of lawful good alignment is walking
along the street when he is confronted by several members of an-
other faith. They exchange cordial greetings and some brief con-
versation. During the chat, the priest is offended by several of the
comments made about his church. This causes him to subcon-
sciously resent the others, but he does not wish to make a public
scene and says nothing about the insults. A passing harrla that
induces rage senses his buried anger and begins to manipulate the
priest’s psyche. Fifteen minutes later, the priest suddenly finds
that he has slain half a dozen innocent men and is now a wanted
criminal. The harrla has done its evil work well.

The harrla is composed of nothing but emotional energy and is
immune to damage from any manner of non-magical weapon.
Further, even magical weapons inflict only half their normal
damage to the creature. Of course, the weapon gains the tradi-
tional bonuses associated with an invisible opponent (-2 sur-
prise modifier, etc.).

Magical spells have a reduced effectiveness against the harrla,
because of its unusual form. It is immune to all spells that inflict
damage based on heat or fire, cold or ice, electricity or lightning,
and those that affect a biological function, such as sleep or cause
light wounds. Emotion controlling spells, such as charm, have
been known to affect the creature, although it gains a +4 bonus
to any saving throw it makes against them.

The harrla’s energy nature gives it the ability to pass through
any solid objects with ease. The only known barriers through
which a harrla cannot pass are those of a magical nature, such as
a protection from evil or similar spell.

When a harrla passes through an individual, it momentarily
infuses the individual with the emotion of the creature. The
harrla does not actually feed upon the character's emotional en-
ergy, and the victim is entitled to a saving throw vs. spells with a
+2 bonus to avoid its influence. If the save fails, the victim is
consumed by the emotion for 1d4 rounds. Because the creature is
not actually feeding when it does this, the harrla does not drain
someone of a Charisma point.

While the harrla is indeed a dangerous adversary, it is not with-
out weaknesses. Experience has shown that each and every harrla
has a special weakness related to the emotion that it projects. For
example, one scholar, a noted authority on paranormal crea-
tures, reports that he once encountered a harrla that induced an
utterly consuming depression in its victims. This despair was so
great as to be life threatening. Upon researching the local rumors,
he found ancient writings that convinced him that the tears of
one of its victims would be damaging to the harrla. Sure enough,
when the sage sprinkled such tears upon the harrla, it let out an
audible shriek of agony and fled the area, never to be “seen”
again.

In addition to its special weakness, a harrla can be driven away

for 10-100 days with a dismissal spell or utterly destroyed with a
banishment spell. The harrla is also vulnerable to spells such as
trap the soul. An emotion control spell cast upon the creature
stuns it for 1d4 rounds, during which time it can attempt no
actions at all and is utterly helpless.

Habitat/Society: The harrla is a strange and solitary creature. It
has no social organization, but drifts like a hunting shark
through the sea of humanity in search of a victim. When it finds a
target, it strikes.

Harrla seem to develop some sort of psychological attachment
to their victims. They become fascinated with the character's
ability to “feel” and the intensity of its emotions. They tend to
linger near past victims, waiting for a chance to dominate them
again. It is not uncommon for an individual to fall into repeated
periods of domination over the course of several days until, ex-
hausted by the feedings of the harrla and drained of all Cha-
risma, he dies.

On the average, a harrla drives its victims into a super-
emotional state and feeds upon them once or twice a week. A
harrla returns to a victim in its need to feed upon emotional en-
ergy every 2d4 days.

The harrla seldom remains in one place after exhausting a vic-
tim. It seems to be drawn to travel from place to place for some
unknown reason. Those who would stalk these creatures are of-
ten placed in a situation where they must defeat it quickly or it
escapes them. It is often possible, however, to track a harrla from
town to town simply by keeping records of unusual events. For
example, if a party of adventurers suspects that a hate-causing
harrla is in their area, they might locate it by making a map and
marking places where unusual acts of violence have occurred.

Of course, this method of tracking a harrla does not work for
those that infuse less obvious emotions. A harrla that causes its
victims to experience passion or fear, for example, might be
much harder to track since reports of its activities would be far
less likely to surface.

Ecology: The harrla seems to be a natural creature. While some
speculate that it is undead or of extraplanar origin, there seems to
be little proof of this. Most sages agree that the harrla is not a
product of the negative material plane, as most undead are. It
appears to be a natural creature that stalks mankind in much the
same way that wolves might hunt sheep who have wandered
from the flock.

Although little is understood about the harrla’s need for emo-
tional energy, several theories have been put forth to account for
the creature’s behavior. Perhaps the most convincing of these is
that the harrla stimulates emotions in others because it lacks
them itself. According to this school of thought, the harrla’s soul
is barren and without happiness. In order to experience the joys
of emotion, such as the warm touch of a lover’s kiss, the stimulat-
ing fury of an angry rage, or the vibrant excitement of terror, the
creature must make use of proxies.

If true, this theory explains much, including the creature’s ap-
parent attraction to those who do not normally display the emo-
tion that it stimulates, for it desires to share the thrill of these
emotions with those who also, in its mind, lack them. Whether
this is true or not, only further studies of the creature’s tragic in-
fluence will tell.
Haun

ANG

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Arctic ice pack and glaciers
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Brood
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night
DIET: Scavenger
INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (15-16)
TREASURE: Nil, W
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic (evil)
NO. APPEARING: 2-5 (1-4 + 1)
ARMOR CLASS: 10
MOVEMENT: 6
HIT DICE: Y (1-4 hp)
THACO: 20
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 bite
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Psionics
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Psionics
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil
SIZE: S (4' long)
MORALE: Average (8)
XP VALUE: 175
PSIONIC STRENGTH:
Attack/
Level Dis/Sci/Dev Defense Score PSPs
3 2/2/7 I/M- = Int 120

* Psychokenesis — Sciences: telekinesis. Devotions: animate ob-
jects, inertial barrier.

* Telepathy - Sciences: mindlink. Devotions: aversion (to
worms) contact, inflict pain, invisibility, repugnance.

(*) For use with the Complete Psionics Handbook; non-psionic

alternatives are given in the Combat Section.

Hauns are chaotic ice worms with mental powers. They often
parasite haundars (q.v.) which they use to travel outside their
frozen tunnel lairs.

A haun looks like a furry gray maggot with occasional purple
or black warts. Its small, slimy face is devoid of hair, and features
two tiny black eyes and a mouth with serrated teeth. This fat
worm undulates and jiggles like gelatin in order to move. Its in-
ternal organs create constant waves and swells visible under-
neath its skin. A haun often produces slight hums, growls, clicks,
snaps, pops, and other chattering sounds, depending on its hu-
mor, which are its primary communication method. It can also
use its psionic mindlink ability to communicate quietly.

A haun is only capable of a slow slither. However, once per
turn it can compress its body, and release enough energy to leap
up or forward. In this manner, it can leap forward up to 18 feet
(3d6 feet) or upward up to 9 feet (1d6 +3 feet). A haun can bur-
row through ice at half its normal slithering speed.

Hauns are notorious parasites of the haundar. Haundar are
huge slugs that hauns use, literally speaking, as moving fortress-
es. When one is found, a haun brood attempts to get closer and
then leaps on its tail. From there, they can burrow under the
haundar’s thick armor. The brood usually carves out a hollow
chamber under the thickest part of the armor on the haundar’s
back. This is done at no damage to the haundar, since this part of
its body is mostly fat. The hauns cut out small slits into the cara-
pace, in the manner of a fortress.

Hauns can spin silk to close off openings, fabricate warm,
comfortable cocoons, or store food. Hauns are naturally incapa-
ble of making armor or using weapons or objects of any kind.
They can, however, psionically animate objects.

 

  
 
  
      

   

oS LON <) ws SS mo

 

a.

 

 

 

Combat: The best hauns can physically do is force an opponent
to fall over another haun strategically placed behind him, and try
to bite him when on the floor. Hauns cannot bite anything higher
than 2 feet above them because of their small size. Once per en-
counter, however, they may attack someone by leaping. Hauns
always try to avoid getting personally caught in a melee. To at-
tack foes, hauns much prefer riding inside their haundars. They
direct the huge creatures to crush foes in their way.

As an alternative to psionics, hauns can once a day use shield,
invisibility, scare, suggestion, and telekinesis. Otherwise, hauns
use their psionic abilities to harm their foes. Initially, they remain
invisible, and inflict pain or provoke repugnance among their
foes. Otherwise, hauns activate their inertial barrier, and cause
aversion while they attempt to flee.

Habitat/Society: Hauns live in tunnel networks in the ice. Several
broods can share a large network. They are fiercely independent,
and recognize no leader among them. Hauns are prone to inces-
sant palaver and sudden, often short-lived quarrels that may or
may not lead to a consensus decision (50% chance at best).

Hauns prey on sha’az (q.v.) eggs because they contain a sub-
stance reducing resistance to mental contact. The eggs allow au-
tomatic success for psionic contact and mindlink (except on a roll
of 20), and so at half the required PSPs (Psionic Strength Points,
rounded down) for a period of a week per egg. When inside the
haundar, the parasites inject the egg’s contents into the haundar’s
blood.

With these eggs, hauns easily establish and maintain a psionic
mindlink with haundars and make it understand that if it does
not obey, pain will soon follow. Haundar behavior ultimately
changes after years of this treatment, and they become totally

submissive. Owning a haundar is a status symbol among haun
broods.

Ecology: Hauns feed on lichen and rotten flesh. They routinely
slither through shallow tunnels, seeking carcasses left by preda-
tors.
Haundar

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Icebergs, arctic valleys
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day
DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Animal (1)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 2
MOVEMENT: 6, Fl 12 (D)
HIT DICE: 20

THACO: 1

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 bite
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-16 (2d8)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spit acid
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

 

SIZE: G (30' long, 10! tall)
MORALE: Elite (15)
XP VALUE: 12,000

The haundar is a gargantuan ice-slug. A very thick, flat shell cov-
ers most of the haundar’s back and its head. It is articulated in
order to ease the creature’s movement. The shell and the remain-
der of the haundar’s body are white, with a slight green shimmer.

Thick fur covers the part of the haundar’s body that its shell
does not protect. The creature maintains body temperature
thanks to a very thick, nutritious blubber under its skin. The
largest quantity of body fat is located under the thickest part of
the creature's shell, about 10 feet away from the head.

Like other common slugs, the haundar uses two retractile eye-
stalks, and two extra pseudopods to see and feel its way. Its
mouth is located between the two lower pseudopods. The haun-
dar’s mouth is filled with an array of shark-like teeth that grow
continuously. The haundar has infravision.

The haundar is capable of levitating, and moving through the
air at a slow pace. It cannot fly in blizzard conditions.

Combat: The haundar fights primarily with its mouth, inflicting
2d8 points of damage per bite. Otherwise, it uses its acid spit
which can reach a range of 12 feet. The haundar’s acid strikes the
target with an attack roll sufficient to hit Armor Class 0. The
target consists of everything within a 10-foot radius from the
point of impact. The acid causes 4d8 points of damage. A suc-
cessful save vs. breath weapon allows the acid to cause only half
damage. Victims who fail their saving throw must check all of
their equipment to see if acid has affected any item.

The armored shell of the haundar is Armor Class 2. The un-
protected parts of its body are Armor Class 6. If the haundar’s
eyestalks or sensory pseudopods are attacked, the haundar in-
stantly retracts them to avoid wounds. It keeps them retracted
until the end of the combat encounter. The haundar can rely on
its sense of smell to fight, but would do so with a -3 attack pen-
alty.

Exposed stalks are Armor Class 8. Any single attack causing 10
points of damage or more either severs or incapacitates one eye-
stalk or pseudopod. The haundar needs at least one eyestalk to
travel and hunt. Without its eyestalks, the haundar eventually
dies of hunger. The pseudopods are sensory organs that tell the
haundar which direction it flies, and at which altitude and speed.
It cannot fly without at least one pseudopod. The severed stalks
regrow within a month.

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: The haundar lives in large rocky caves, huge
cracks in the ice, or caverns dug into the ice. Its sleeps there, pro-
tects itself from blizzard conditions, and reproduces there. Occa-
sionally, the lair connects with haun broods (q.v.). These worms
are common parasites of the haundar.

The haundar is a migrating creature. If not hosting haun para-
sites, it travels the icy desert, trying to remain within a specific
range of temperatures. In summer it moves north, while in winter
it travels south. Migration patterns follow that of other beings,
such as bears, seals, moose, and sometimes man.

When it is the farthest north and when food becomes scarce, it
begins the mating season. Haundars are hermaphrodites, being
both male and female. In order to begin the reproductive cycle,
the haundar must fly almost continually for days. At last, it re-
turns to its lair and lays 4d4 eggs. Exhausted, the haundar goes
dormant for several weeks.

The eggs have little chance of hatching. Successful reproduc-
tion happens only once in a haundar’s lifetime, for the hatchlings
feed on the parent while it is dormant. As an average, two hatch-
lings become adults, and one successfully reproduces. Hatchlings
grow at the rate of 1 HD (or 1% feet a year) if properly fed.
Haundars live as long as 60 years.

Ecology: The haundar is a dangerous predator. It feeds on almost
anything that it can catch. The haundar is rare, since it is one of
the main elements in the sha’az (q.v.) diet. Haundars indeed pro-
vide a very large, single source of meat that can feed an entire
sha’az hive for weeks. Its blubber is used for oils. Its eyestalks are
in demand for potions of infravision, and its lower pseudopods
can be used as a potent ingredient in potions of levitation. The
armor can be broken into smaller pieces and re-used as plate ar-
mor elements. A complete suit of armor made of this material
weighs half its equivalent metal armor for the same protection,
and is acid resistant. It also costs twice as much to build. Some
northern knight orders may be willing to pay dearly for haundar
shell pieces.
Hendar

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Desolate areas (temperate)
FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Omnivorous, but prefer meat
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: All possible, but no silver
ALIGNMENT: Neutral (evil)

NO. APPEARING: 1 (1-3)

ARMOR CLASS: 5

MOVEMENT: 6, Sw 18, FI 15(C)

HIT DICE: 6+6

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-8/1-3, or special

 

SPECIAL ATTACKS:
SPECIAL DEFENSES:

Drowning dive
Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: L (14’-22’ wingspan)
MORALE: Fearless (18)

XP VALUE: 975

 

The heavily-bodied, fearsome, black hendar resembles a vast
worm with bat wings and a horse-like head. It is a solitary hunter
and is always encountered alone except during mating season.
Hendar live in ruins, sea-caves, swamps, or atop moorland
crags, preferring desolate places to well-populated areas, al-
though they occasionally venture into populated areas to find
food, especially when the hunting is bad in their territory. When
they attack for food, they prefer humanoids to quadrupeds such
as cattle and horses.

The creatures are black, with blue and purple iridescence when
wet, and have fiery red eyes. When angered, hendar snort vapor
from their nostrils and emit deep, rumbling roars. The manes of
older individuals turn gray and then white with age. Hendar are
thought to have a life span of hundreds of years.

Combai: Hendar can swim almost as fast as they can fly, by pow-
erful beats of their tail and leathery wings. Although they prefer
to hunt in shallow waters, they can survive at great depths. Their
favorite attack is to crash into aerial targets, buffeting with their
wings and/or tails for 2-8 points of damage, and biting for 1-3
points of damage. If an opponent irritates them, they grasp with
their tail and jaws, and dive from the air, deep into the water to
drown their foe. Conversely, if the foe is aquatic, the hendar
bursts up from the air and flies toward land so that its foe expires
from being out of water or suffers injury when dropped. An un-
gainly crawler on land, the hendar is a powerful but stodgy flier,
bad-tempered and vain, often found gazing at its own reflection
in still water. Hendar possess 120-foot infravision for use in night
hunting.

Because of their great size, hendar fear almost nothing, and
only stop an attack on foes when clearly outnumbered. Hendar
never capitulate or cease an attack on a single enemy of size M or
smaller. While they are of average intelligence, they cannot ad-
mit to themselves that any single creature smaller than them-
selves poses a threat.

 

 

 

 

 

Wabitat/Society: Hendar have no society to speak of, since they
usually cannot tolerate the presence of other hendar, except dur-
ing mating periods. Even during this period, they are snappy and
skittish near one another, and even go out of their way to attack
other creatures.

They prefer to live in damp areas, for this keeps their skin
strong and supple. If transplanted to another, drier area, their
skin weakens, and they become Armor Class 6, and receive 1-4
points of additional damage per day because of the weakness of
their skin. As well, extreme cold cracks their skin, causing similar
results. Thus, they are only found in the middle reaches of the
Sword Coast, usually never farther south than Amn or farther
north than Luskan, and on the northern coast of the Sea of Fallen
Stars.

Ecology: Hendar seldom mate, usually every thirty years or so.
The parents cohabit for a year or so until the young achieve full
strength and flight ability. Each mating typically produces 5-8
eges, but only 2-4 usually hatch. Young hendar strike out on their
own when they acquire their full powers at 3+3 Hit Dice size.
The wing buffet attack of such a youngling causes only 2-6 points
of damage. Although the hendar have no natural enemy, the
young do not often survive for long because of lack of food. This
accounts for the rarity of hendar in the Realms.

Hendar sleep during the winter months, for the cold slows
them to half speed and could potentially make them easy prey for
any target they chose to attack. When they wake in the spring,
they are extremely ravenous, and often feed twice in a night. This
behavior lasts for roughly a month, after which period they once
again resume their ordinary once a week hunting schedule.

Hendar and perytons generally tolerate each other, but the
hendar attempts to slay or drive out any other large predators,
aerial or aquatic, living within a mile of their lairs.
Inquisitor

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Urban/subterranean
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night
DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: High (13-14)
TREASURE: WwW
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 4
MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 6

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4/1-6

 

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Disease, fear, paralysis, torture
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Spell immunity
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (6' tall)
MORALE: Fanatic (17-18)
XP VALUE: 3,000

 

Created by evil wizards centuries ago, inquisitors are a sham-
bling, rotting, undead abomination, living on sheer terror. Each
is an ancient expert in torture and information extraction, an art-
ist who works in screams and agony. Those without masters
dwell in dark places where they can take prisoners and ask im-
possible questions that let them further perfect their techniques.
Some inquisitors are themselves imprisoned by more powerful
beings and forced to work their trade on demand, longing for the
day they put their masters on the rack.

An inquisitor can be easily mistaken for a zombie or other un-
dead. Nearly half of its flesh has rotted away, exposing tendons
and yellowing bones. Many wear black hoods, but those who
don’t display foul smelling mucous dripping from their eyes and
mouths. An inquisitor wears tattered pants and shoes, but no shirt
or gloves. Its hands are charred from years of using red-hot torture
implements, and its thick, yellow nails poke menacingly from its
fingers. One is seldom encountered without its whip in hand.

An inquisitor can speak and understand Common and any ra-
cial languages particular to its location.

Combat: An inquisitor’s horrifying appearance and its reputation
for lingering torture and death require those who see him to suc-
cessfully save vs. paralyzation or flee in fear for 1-6 rounds.
Once a victim has failed this saving throw, his attacks against
that inquisitor are made with a -2 penalty to the attack roll,
even after the victim stops fleeing.

The inquisitor’s gaze requires one opponent per round to suc-
cessfully save vs. paralyzation or be paralyzed for 1-4 turns. This
gaze attack is in addition to any physical attacks it makes during
the round. On a successful saving throw, a victim can never be
paralyzed by that particular inquisitor.

Each round an inquisitor can attack with its whip, causing 1-4
points of damage, and scratch with the nails on its other hand,
causing 1-6 points of damage. Any victim who is hit with the
nails must successfully save vs. poison to avoid a wasting disease
that causes him to lose one point of Strength and one point of
Constitution per day until cured. Only cure disease can rid a
character of the affliction and restore lost points. If either ability
score reaches zero the victim dies.

If an inquisitor manages to capture a victim, it chains and shack-
les him to a table and gleefully begins its torture. The inquisitor’s
torture causes considerable pain and disfigurement. At the end of

 

 

 

 

every day of torture, the victim must successfully save vs. paraly-
zation or become insane. While insane, the character may still at-
tempt to escape the inquisitor and may defend himself, but is
unable to distinguish his friends from enemies or interact with fa-
miliar places or situations. The character may only regain his sani-
ty with time, 1-4 weeks after the torture has ended. In any event,
the character loses one point of Charisma after being tortured by
an inquisitor. This point can only be regained through magical
healing such as a heal spell intended for this purpose only.

An inquisitor is immune to all mind affecting spells, such as
charm, geas, or illusions.

Habitat/Society: Every inquisitor has its own torture chamber for
its lair. The chamber can be in a dungeon or cave, in the secluded
wilderness, or even in the town square. The devices it has vary,
including but not limited to racks, iron maidens, thumb screws,
vices and clamps, or even more exotic devices such as large hel-
mets filled with hungry insects or rats. When screaming victims
offer bribes to lessen their punishment, an inquisitor often keeps
the gems and coins for itself rather than alert its master. Any trea-
sure is hidden in or around the inquisitor’s chamber. Of course,
no bribe will stay an inquisitor from its task.

The inquisitor’s home is its torture chamber. It only strays
from its chamber when in search of new victims. If supplied with
ample subjects for its torture, an inquisitor may not willingly
leave his chamber for years or even centuries at a time.

The inquisitor is a solitary creature, but may employ lesser be-
ings to do its bidding. Evil creatures such as orcs and kobolds
sometimes make a small profit selling live captives to an inquisitor.

Ecology: Inquisitors are biologically immortal, cursed hundreds
or thousands of years ago to forever cause pain and extract infor-
mation. They cannot reproduce. If an inquisitor is denied the op-
portunity to mercilessly torture victims for a long period of time,
it slowly wastes away and dies. Every year of such denial it loses
one hit point permanently. More powerful beings who use inquis-
itors often keep them in check with threats of victim denial.
Lhiannan Shee

— eee ANNE
PONeenraten

“5

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Subarctic to tropical woodlands
FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Special

INTELLIGENCE: Average to very

TREASURE: K, M,N, U

ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil

NO. APPEARING: 1

 

ARMOR CLASS: 8 in darkness; 5 in strong firelight or
light spell; 2 in sunlight or continual

light spell

 

MOVEMENT: 12
HIT DICE: 5
THACO: 15
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: Special

 

SPECIAL ATTACKS:
SPECIAL DEFENSES:

Charm touch, draining kiss
Selective invisibility, various spell
immunities, struck only by +1 or

better weapons
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 90%

 

SIZE: M

MORALE: Special (always flees if attacked, but
returns later)

XP VALUE: 4,000

Rare in the extreme, the lhiannan shee (LAN-an SHE) is an un-
dead vampiric spirit with an affinity for men of high Charisma
and strong poetic ability—bards. The lhiannan shee looks like a
stunningly beautiful female human, elf, or half-elf. It is thought
to be the undead spirit of a woman who killed herself for the un-
requited love of a bard or other artistically talented and desir-
able, but unobtainable or callous man.

Like many undead, the lhiannan shee is ultimately motivated
to destroy those who fall into its hands. Because of its seductive
nature, however, its victims would often trade their fate with no
other. Bards whisper of such creatures with a mixture of muted
fear and a death-wish desire.

‘axa bat; This undead creature is naturally invisible, but it pos-
sesses the power of selective invisibility and can become visible
to victims at will, with no chance of being detected by anyone
nearby who lacks the use of magic. Anyone using a detect invisi-
bility spell or power has a 1% chance per round, per level of the
spell-user, of detecting the [hiannan shee. For example, a 7th-
level wizard has a 7% chance of detecting the presence of a lhian-
nan shee each round he searches. The same chances apply to
anyone using similar spells and powers, such as detect enemies,
detect evil, detect undead, and so forth. This spirit is instantly
aware of any divination spell cast within 120 feet of it, and it
always seeks to avoid detection.

Because they are so rare and so attracted to bards, lhiannan
shee are almost never encountered anywhere except in the pres-
ence of bards. In regions where [hiannan shee are known to
dwell, a male bard has a 1% chance per month, per level of abili-
ty, of encountering such a creature. The [hiannan shee, once it
detects a possible victim, silently follows and observes the bard
for a period of at least one month before making its presence
known. It follows the unknowing victim everywhere it can possi-
bly go, learning all that it can about him. This foreknowledge,
combined with this creature’s unusual cunning and powers,
makes this undead creature’s methods particularly potent.

The spirit invariably appears to its victim when he is alone and

 

“Beet:

 

 

 

no one else is around to confirm or deny its presence. It then uses
every wile at its command to gain its victim’s interest, from sub-
tle flattery and coyness to blatant propositioning, assuming any
and every role from dignified musical student to charmed trol-
lop. All the lhiannan shee desires at this point is to have the bard
voluntarily touch it or allow himself to be touched, an act that
dooms him almost at once when he feels its cold, silken skin.
This spirit’s physical body and clothing appear perfectly solid
and real when it has materialized, though its physical appearance
and dress never change. It always seems to be freshly bathed, no
matter what environment it inhabits. Some bards have reported
that each Ihiannan shee also has a particular perfume, usually a
flowery scent. At night, a lhiannan shee can pick up physical ob-
jects with an equivalent Strength rating of 8. However, the lhian-
nan shee casts no shadow in light and makes no sound when it
walks or touches any object. During full daylight or a continual
light spell, Ihiannan shee are unable to affect physical objects, so
they avoid daytime except for brief encounters in shadowed
areas. Daylight and continual light spells do improve its Armor
Class, however, by making it less material, and harder to strike.
The lhiannan shee can charm its victim by touch, a power that
works only once each night between dusk and dawn, giving the
bard a -6 penalty to his saving throw. If the bard fails this sav-
ing throw (Wisdom bonuses apply), he regards the lhiannan shee
as his beloved, giving up all other mortal lovers in order to pur-
sue his passion for this unearthly and pitiless spirit. Only a re-
move curse or dispel magic spell cast by a 10th-level or greater
spellcaster, or a wish from a scroll, device, or spell, can break the
hold of the Ihiannan shee’s charm on the victim at this point.
Upon capturing a lover, the Ihiannan shee has the bard visit it
every night thereafter, always in secluded places away from sight
of other mortals. The bard does not willingly reveal why he must
leave each night or where he is going, keeping the supernatural
affair as much a secret as he possibly can. Each night it is 95%
likely that the Ihiannan shee wants the bard to kiss it, an act that
a charmed bard cannot refuse. Only one such kiss is taken each
night. This act automatically and permanently drains 1 hit point
Lhiannan Shee

 

from the bard's hit point total, transferring that hit point to the
Ihiannan shee’s own hit points, up to its maximum total of 40 hit
points. This is the only method by which the Ihiannan shee can
“heal” damage done to it. Hit points so lost by the bard cannot be
recovered except by wish spells that restore 2-5 hit points per
spell, or heal spells that restore 1 hit point per spell.

A bard who is drained in this manner never notices the hit
point loss, though he becomes noticeably paler and weaker and
perhaps seems dazed and distracted to his companions. This hit
point loss does not affect the bard's current level, and he can con-
tinue to gain experience points and new Hit Dice, though he is
not likely to survive more than a month or two of such treat-
ment. Once the bard's hit points drop to zero because of this
draining kiss, the bard dies. Only a resurrection spell cast by a
priest from a spell, device, or scroll, or a wish spell, can then
restore the bard to life and normal sanity again.

A man under the spell of the Ihiannan shee, however, does
everything in his power to resist any attempt to break the spirit’s
control over him. Bards have even been known to attack their
closest friends and allies if they suspected that the latter were pre-
paring to take action against the spirit or to undo the charm cast
over the bard. A man who sees his “beloved” undergo a direct
attack strikes out at the spirit’s assailants with every weapon and
spell at his command, seeking to slay his new “enemies” and gain-
ing a +1 attack bonus on all physical attacks until his “beloved”
has either safely escaped or has been destroyed, which breaks the
charm spell.

The lhiannan shee is affected by magical items giving protec-
tion from undead, such as certain scrolls, and it can be turned or
destroyed by clerics as a wight. Magic resistance does not negate
turning, and turning can be attempted even if a lhiannan shee is
merely suspected but is not seen. Holy water causes 1-4 points of
damage per vial. Only weapons of +1 or greater enchantment
can harm the lhiannan shee, but it must be seen to be so attacked.
No one has ever made a potion of /hiannan shee control, nor is
this likely, because of their rarity.

The [hiannan shee is undead so it is immune to all paralysis
effects, poisons, cold-based and death-magic spells, charms,
holds, sleep, fear, and insanity. Electrical attacks cause half dam-
age and cause the spirit to flee for the night. A raise dead or resur-
rection spell destroys a lhiannan shee if it is cast directly on it by
a cleric who can see the creature. The [hiannan shee’s magic-
resistance rating must first be overcome if it is attacked directly
by magical spells or powers, with the exception of turning.

Habitat/Society: Lhiannan shee are solitary and never found
working in partnership with any other being, living or undead.
They react only to their own desires and whims, ignoring all else
but their victims unless they are attacked or detected. Because of
their love for beautiful places, these spirits usually enjoy springs,
running water in natural surroundings, and unspoiled wood-
lands. Their treasures are merely pretty baubles they have found
on the bodies of their victims, objects they mindlessly play with
when otherwise unoccupied. They approach civilized areas only

if following their victims, and return to their woodlands once
their victims have died or have escaped their control.

The bard Mintiper Moonsilver speaks of these spirits as “the
ghosts of obsession.” Strangely, there is very little poetic or musi-
cal lore about Ihiannan shee. Bards who might know about them
are reluctant to speak of them at all, out of fear of attracting them
or an inability to confront their longing for a lost “love.” Lhian-
nan shee do not return such devotion. Mintiper has claimed that
the faithless Ihiannan shee does not remember any of its past vic-
tims once it has found a new one. Each new victim is like the
creature’s first love. Priests usually serve as the main source of
information on these beings, but priests know very little about
them that is accurate or useful, saying that such spirits are the
just rewards of imprudent bards. Some bards and sages in Water-
deep have begun to speak of them more often these days in hopes
of warning others of their peril. Such warnings are not as effec-
tive as hoped.

Despite the terrifying powers of the lhiannan shee, they do of-
fer perverse benefits to their victims in that the mad passions
bards feel for them actually improve the bards’ talents. As long
as a bard is under a lhiannan shee’s influence, he causes all who
listen to his music or poetry to make saving throws vs. paralyza-
tion at a penalty of -1 for every two experience levels of the
bard. Those failing the save have their reactions modified by two
levels as per the Encounter Reactions table on page 103 of the
Dungeon Master’s Guide. Those making their saving throws feel
acutely uncomfortable with the bard's performance, finding it
somehow disturbing and unnatural. Their reactions are modified
by two levels in the direction opposite that which was intended.

A bard controlled by a lhiannan shee also has doubled effects
when using his music and poetry to inspire or rally others. This
results in either a +2 bonus to the attack rolls of all allies, a +2
bonus to the saving throws of all allies, or a +4 bonus to allied
morale. These bonuses can affect allies in melee and come into
effect after three full rounds of singing or reciting before a battle
begins. Because of the tragic nature of the liaison between the
undead being and its victim, the bard is also capable of singing
and lowering Morale scores by 4 points, if he so desires, instilling
deep depression in all who hear him. These effects apply within a
range of 10 feet per experience level of the bard.

Furthermore, the charmed bard causes all listening beings to
take an additional penalty of -2 on all saving throws against the
effects of musically based magical items such as pipes, drums,
horns, lyres, harps, or chimes. Characters within 60 feet of a per-
forming bard are also rendered immune to the effects of songs
and poetry used as magical attacks, such as the singing of harpies
or other bards.

Ecology: Like all undead, Ihiannan shee are predators who return
nothing to living ecologies. Their effects are ecologically minus-
cule, since they prey only on bards, but they are feared far out of
proportion to their numbers. Lhiannan shee are known only
from the lands of the Forgotten Realms, though some have now
been reported roaming the islands of the plane of Ravenloft.
Loxo

SET iy ETT
TALS\S)
i

ONEN RE

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate or tropical grasslands
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Herd

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Herbivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low to exceptional (5-16)
TREASURE: U (2)

ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 10-60

ARMOR CLASS: 6

MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 4+4

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2

DAMAGE/ATTACKS: 2-12/2-12 or by weapon

 

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Trample, berserker rage
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Possible spell use
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

 

SIZE: L (8 tall)
MORALE: Champion (15)
XP VALUE: 650

Fithik: 975

Lox-fithik: 2,000

Tunnuk: Varies

A loxo appears to be a humanoid elephant. Its skin is bluish-gray
and wrinkled, with rough hair sparsely covering it. It has thick
round limbs, flat feet, and short, stubby fingers. Large ears grace
the sides of its head, and tusks protrude from its face.

Its most striking features are the two trunks which grow from
the center of its face. Each trunk is about two feet long and has
three finger-like digits at the end.

These creatures wear simple, rustic clothing, favoring cloth
with patterns, such as circles and diamonds.

Combat: Loxoth are normally peaceful, though the males defend
their territory and families with great tenacity. They prefer melee
combat to long-range combat, and use few missile weapons, in-
cluding throwing clubs and shuriken. Preferred melee weapons
are dirks, clubs, and footman’s maces. Fully 60% of loxoth carry
iron maces, with half of those also carrying shuriken. Another
20% also carry a heavy melee club and two throwing clubs,
while 10% use dirk and shuriken. The remaining 10% carry only
a footman’s mace or a tetsubo, and iron-shod club.

If threatened, half the loxo males remain to defend the females
and young, while the other half charges into a counter-attack.
They use their trunks to throw shuriken, and can do so in the
same round in which they attack with a melee weapon. If charg-
ing man-sized or smaller opponents, the loxoth may choose to
make a trampling attack, causing 2-16 points of damage with a
successful hit.

If a loxo’s family is threatened, there is a 10% chance per round
(non-cumulative) that it enters a berserker-like rage. This rage
gives the loxo an extra attack each round, a +2 bonus to his at-
tack rolls, and 10 temporary hit points. The berserker rage lasts
until the danger to the loxo’s family has passed. A berserker loxo
never attacks another loxo.

For every 10 loxoth encountered, there is one 5th-level fighter,
called a fithik, or lieutenant. Each herd, no matter what the size,
also has one lox-fithik, or chief, who has all the abilities of a 7th-
level fighter.

Half of all herds have a tunnuk, or wizard. A loxo wizard may
advance as high as 20th level, and uses its spells as needed to pro-
tect its tribe.

Habitat/Society: According to loxo historians, the loxoth used
spelljamming ships to settle on the planet Toril nearly three gen-
erations ago, or about 240 years ago. Their settlement was rather
small, however. They settled in the Shaar, with a few of the more
adventurous herds traveling to the Hordelands. The natives ac-
cepted them without a fight, allowing them to settle peacefully.
However, loxoth are very distrustful of strangers.

The loxoth are semi-nomadic, traveling the grasslands in small
clan-like herds. A herd consists of 1-6 small family units, as well
as a group of unattached males. Each family unit is made up of
one male, 1-3 females, and 3-12 young loxoth. The unattached
males number 6-24. Each herd is descended from passengers of a
single ship, and they remember that ship in their songs and sto-
ries. All descendants from a given ship use the same pattern in
their clothing.

When a herd becomes too large to support itself, it splits into
two parts, with the younger leader taking his herd into a new
territory. All the herds descended from a given ship remain
friendly to one another.

Male loxoth are dominant in their society both politically and
militarily. Only a female loxo may become a tunnuk, however,
and all herds trace their ancestry to the tunnuk who acted as
spelljammer for their ship.

Male loxoth often have as many mates as they can defend from
other males. Loxoth may mate during any time of the year, but
take as mates only those who can trace their ancestry back to the
same ship. After a gestation period of 18 months, the female
gives birth to one or two calves. Loxoth may live as long as 200
years. There are only a few dozen tribes of loxo throughout the
Realms.

If a male loxo sees his family die or be killed, he often (95%)
“goes rogue.” He enters the berserk state, attacking any non-loxo
he encounters, and threatening any loxo who approaches. He re-
mains in the berserk state, losing 1-6 hit points per day until he
dies from exhaustion.

Some loxoth are artisans and work with wood, metal, and ivo-
ry from the tusks of their dead. Loxoth make their own weapons,
using their strong, clumsy hands to form dirk and blunt weap-
ons. For finer work, they use their weaker, more dexterous
trunks. Ivory is always carved into religious figurines and kept as
family heirlooms, while wood is shaped into various decora-
tions. Loxoth also use their trunks to shape and sharpen shuriken
and to make jewelry. Because of their physical limitations, loxoth
can produce only very crude or very fine metalwork, with noth-
ing in between. So while they can make maces and fine jewelry,
swords are beyond their ability.

Ecology: Loxoth eat a great amount of grass and other plant ma-
terial, often as much as 100 pounds per day each. They work
diligently to protect and preserve their grazing lands. They travel
to different areas periodically, and plant fruit trees and grains in
all the areas they frequent, so they might have a variety of food.

Loxoth use their fine artwork for trade. Those who settled in
the Shaar trade with the dwarves of the Great Rift and offer them
fine jewelry and occasional spellcasting in return for raw materi-
als.

Loxo tusks are worth up to 250 gold pieces each, but stealing,
buying, or trading them is considered the highest crime among
the loxoth.
Manni

“Pwpiae BSE if

—_———

ONS ard

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate forest and steppe
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Flock
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Dusk

DIET: Scavenger
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: P (Y x2, W)
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1-6

ARMOR CLASS: 5
MOVEMENT: 9, FL 18

HIT DICE: 3

THACO: 7

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6 and by weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (4-5)
MORALE: Unsteady (5-7)
XP VALUE: 65

The manni, also known as kara or “black ones,” are a pes-
tiferous and evil race that haunt the bleak and wasted
corners of the steppe. They are fond of decay and death
and are often found near grave mounds and in ruins.

The manni looks like a humanoid, long-beaked crow or
raven. It stands on two bandy bird legs. The body is com-
pletely covered by black feathers, hence its nickname. It
has long wings instead of arms. The feathers hide three
long fingers that allow the manni to grasp and use items.
It does not speak any human tongue, but communicates
in a series of clacks and whistles.

Combat; The manni is a furtive and cowardly creature,
preferring to avoid combat when possible. However,
since it must eat and it cannot always rely on the kills of
others, the manni is sometimes forced to fight. When it
must make a kill, the manni prefers to attack from am-
bush at times when it is certain to win uninjured. To this
end, it will build snares along game trails, lurk on the
edges of encampments, and attack with an entire flock,
overwhelming by sheer numbers.

In combat, the manni fights with its sharp beak and a
weapon. Most often this is a spear, the easiest item for
the manni to use with its awkward wings. In some cases a
club is favored. Swords are not used by the bird men, as
these are too difficult for the creatures to manage.

In addition to its beak and weapons, the manni can
also use its wings to buffet an opponent. Generally, this is
a tactic of last resort, since it requires the creature to get
very close to the enemy and places it at risk of being
grappled. Buffeting causes little damage, only 1-2
points, but can disorient and confuse an opponent long
enough for the manni to fly away. Creatures buffeted
must make a saving throw vs. spells or be stunned for
one round.

Wabitat/Society: The manni are a fairly loathsome and
disgusting race of creatures. Not noble, brave, or trust-
worthy, they live as scavengers on the steppe.

The manni form together in flocks of 10-30 individuals.
Of these no more than one-fourth are males. The remain-
der are females and young. In combat there is no differ-

 

 

 

 

 

ence between the males and females, and the young are
too helpless to fight. Any hatchling old enough to bear
weapons is treated as an adult.

The flock lives in a poor imitation of a village. It is usu-
ally located in a sheltered stand of woods or hollow. Here
the manni make their nests, simple domed huts of woven
grass and branches. These are carefully camouflaged
with branches, moss, grass, and dead leaves. The huts
are not particularly weatherproof, but they do provide
some protection from the elements.

As scavengers, manni are far from the cleanest of crea-
tures. Their villages are rank with decay and pollution. In
times of famine, the manni dig up burial mounds, tear
apart wind burials, and have even been known to eat
their own dead.

The manni have no liking for humans. They fear the
“wingless ones,” and because they fear, they hate the hu-
mans. The humans care no more for the manni, either,
and nomads usually attempt to kill them on sight.

The manni speak their own tongue and no other. Al-
though they can learn to understand human languages,
it is impossible for their beaks to speak human words.

Ecology: As scavengers, the manni fill a clear-cut niche
in the ecology of the plains. Their own weaknesses, cruel-
ties, and cowardice keep them from dominant roles in
the land and so they have been surpassed by others.

Manni feathers are used for decorations by some of the
nomadic tribes. Merchants have also been known to buy
the feathers for sale in exotic markets.
Mara (“Great Walker”)

mee SS NS
Kraneronran

si

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Variable
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Group
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Nocturnal
DIET: Special
INTELLIGENCE: Semi (2-4)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1-3
ARMOR CLASS: 5
MOVEMENT: 6

HIT DICE: 10

THACO: 11

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACKS: 3-12/3-12/1-6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 25%

 

SIZE: L (20' tall)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 5,000

Mara are chaotic evil spirits that inhabit great bodies of stone. In
this form they walk the cold regions at night, slaying all who
cross their path. At dawn they are gone, their inexorable passage
marked by great swaths of uprooted trees, crushed undergrowth,
and huge trails studded with deep imprints that lie fully nine feet
apart.

Mara are reputed to be 20 feet tall or more, gray-green in color,
like weathered stone, and of hulking humanoid shape. Their
most dangerous features include two massive stony arms that
end in rending claws, and a hooked beak that can crush and tear.
It is reported that their eyes glow red when they are tracking a
quarry.

Mara communicate among themselves with bird-like cries,
whistling, and calls. They can understand, and may respond to,
simple mental commands.

Combat: The mara stoops to attack with rending claws and
hooked beak. If both claws hit the same target, the bite hits auto-
matically, inflicting double damage. A mara can be affected by
any weapon, but has a 25% resistance to magic.

Bright, direct sunlight immobilizes a mara’s “body” and _ren-
ders it unfit for the mara’s spirit. This effectively defeats the crea-
ture, driving the spirit into painful exile on an outer plane. Many
mara have been trapped by the sun, and their abandoned stone
bodies form circles and groups of standing stones to this day.

Magical and man-made light, such as fire or lantern light, have
no effect on the mara, nor does light from such creatures as will
o’ wisps. At night or in stormy, overcast, or foggy conditions,
mara roam at will. They can sense the presence or coming of day-
light, and instinctively move to a place of concealment where
they can survive until the next night.

They can walk under or through water without harm, but if
entangled or mired and then exposed to sunlight they are de-
stroyed. If covered, or too deep for light to reach, mara are unaf-
fected by sunlight, which makes deep ponds and other bodies of
water possible lairs for mara.

 

 

 

 

Mara are unaffected by charm, sleep, hold, and similar mind-
affecting magic, or by cold-based attacks. A holy word drives the
spirit of a mara from its stone body, but if the body stands where
light cannot reach, a mara spirit may later return.

Habitat/Society: Mara are huge fey creatures that roam cold re-
gions, hunting all creatures in their paths. Dormant in shadowed
lairs by day, the mara rouse themselves at night to stalk the coun-
tryside. They walk the countryside singly or in small groups,
thus, their nickname “great walkers.” Crashing through under-
brush and forested areas, they shake the ground with their tread,
and even deep snow does not hinder them. A mara plows a trail
or swath up to six feet wide with its body. Mara-trails often af-
ford the only passage through the snowfields of the frozen north.

A mara is very slow, but very strong and fearless. Its keen
senses let it track its quarry by scent, with the same chance of
success as a ranger. However, the creature has little or no mind. It
cannot comprehend someone leaping a gap or from one tree to
another. If the prey takes refuge in a structure or faces a mara in
open battle, the mara is a deadly foe. It can effortlessly uproot
trees and crush undergrowth, and the icy grip of its stone claws
can crush armor, flesh, and bone alike.

Ecology: Mara are subservient to tanar’ri and other powerful
lower planar creatures of like alignment. Further, they can sense
the presence of such creatures within a day’s ride and move to aid
or join them if possible. The creatures cannot gate mara in, how-
ever. If more than one chaotic evil lower planar creature is
present, the mara obeys the most powerful. Typical simple com-
mands that mara might receive from their master include orders
to search here and there, to find and slay, or hold, a certain crea-
ture, and include a mental picture of the quarry or places to
search for it.

The exact mechanism by which mara occupy their stony
bodies, and the way in which their spirits make their way from
the lower planes to the Prime Material Plane is unknown.
Morin

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Plains or steppe
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Pack
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Dusk
DIET: Scavenger
INTELLIGENCE: Animal (1)
TREASURE: (Z)
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 3-12
ARMOR CLASS: 7
MOVEMENT: 18

HIT DICE: 2

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 6
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-2 each
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Swarm
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Burrowing
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: S (1'-2')
MORALE: Special
XP VALUE: 120

The morin is a dangerous, but rarely seen, creature of the
steppes. However, when it does appear, its ferocity,
speed, and numerous attacks make it dangerous.

The morin is a small creature, oblate in shape. The
head and rear are difficult to distinguish, except for the
beaklike mouth. The creature’s eyes are small and weak.
It has six short legs that end in thick claws good for bur-
rowing and slashing. The creature is dirty mauve, pale
and sickly in appearance. It is almost hairless.

Combat: The morin is a pack animal and is never en-
countered singly. Individually, it is not a fearsome crea-
ture, although its numerous attacks do pose a threat.

When attacking, the morin springs at its target. The
creature can only leap 3 feet, but this is sufficient to take
down most of its prey. In the first round of combat, it at-
tacks with all six legs, becoming a miniature whirlwind of
claws. If four or more attacks hit, the creature grips its
target and thereafter automatically causes 1 point of
damage per gripping claw each round. It retains its hold
until someone—it or the victim—dies. Those encum-
bered by a gripping morin suffer a -1 on their chance to
hit for each creature. Thus, a warrior with three of the
beasts clinging to him has a -3 modifier on his rolls to hit.

What makes the morin truly fearsome, however, is the
swarm. Whenever eight or more morin are encountered,
the creatures are swarming. A swarm will attack any liv-
ing creature the size of a horse or less. The entire swarm
attacks a single target. Instead of calculating each at-
tack individually, a single roll is made for the entire
swarm (THACO 17 for their ferocity). The swarm attack
causes 2 points of damage for each creature in the
swarm. Thus, a swarm of 11 creatures causes 22 points
of damage. If the target is not killed in the first attack, 2-
12 morin cling to it. These creatures cause an automatic
4 points of damage per creature in subsequent rounds.
Once the victim is slain the morin immediately begin bur-
rowing, taking their prey with them.

Perhaps once in a score of years, the morin gather into
a great swarm of 100 or more creatures. They are the
stuff of terrifying tales when they appear. When this hap-
pens, there is little for normal folk to do but leave the

 

 

 

 

 

area. Such swarms eventually disintegrate through attri-
tion and natural events.

Morin normally have a morale of 12. However, while
swarming they never make morale checks.

Habitat/Society: The morin are burrowing pack crea-
tures, living in colonies known as pods. During most of
the day they live in colonies beneath the surface. These
are collections of tunnels, dens, bolt holes, and storage
chambers. On the surface, a morin colony looks very
much like a prairie dog town—mounds built up around
holes. One or two morin are always on watch, although
they have few predators to fear.

The morin are exceptionally fast diggers, using this
ability to hunt, lying in wait just below the surface. More
often they rely on their speed to run down their prey.

The morin are adapted to life in the plains in other
ways. They breed quickly, producing litters of two to five
young every year. They drink little, getting most of their
moisture from their kills. During times of drought the
morin hibernate in large underground nests, sealed off
from the surface. All the members of the pod hibernate in
a single chamber. When the rains return, the morin surge
forth and immediately swarm in search of food. The
chance to encounter morin increases after a thunder-
storm, making such times dangerous on the steppe.

Ecology: The morin are predators and scavengers. While
they prefer to make their own kills, the pack will also
scavenge carrion on the steppe. They normally hunt
small mammals and antelope and only attack humans or
larger targets when they are swarming. They are a plague
on shepherds, since sheep are a favorite prey.
Naga, Dark

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any except arctic/any land

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Trios, pairs, alone or work with
other lawful evil creatures

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (16)

TREASURE: S, T, W

ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil

NO. APPEARING: 1-3 (usually 1)

 

 

ARMOR CLASS: 6
MOVEMENT: 13

HIT DICE: 9

THACO: 13 (11 if 9-HD)
NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4/2-8

 

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

 

SIZE: L (up to 12’ long)
MORALE: Champion (15)
XP VALUE: 4,000

Dark nagas are fey creatures who have human-like faces (with
fanged mouths) on leathery, snake-like bodies. They usually
work with other evil beings for mutual gain or survival. Dark
nagas tend to be black, purplish-black, or very dark blue in hue,
and their crested heads and smooth, almost invisible scales make
them look like gigantic eels more than snakes.

Combat: Dark nagas have natural ESP powers (80’ range), and
use this ability constantly.

Dark nagas have a (non-poisonous) bite and a poisonous tail-
sting; the barbed stinger does physical damage, and any struck
being must save vs. poison or take 1-2 hp additional damage and
fall into a drugged sleep (onset time 1 round, sleep lasts 2d4
rounds).

The most feared ability of dark nagas is their power to wield
magic. A dark naga casts spells as a 6th level wizard (4,2,2), and
employs verbal-only spells. It may learn these spells from drag-
ons, Phaerimm, or other creatures who can cast spells with but a
word or thought (act-of-will spells, as opposed to spell-like natu-
ral powers, can easily be altered into verbal-release magics .. .
but the devising of a verbal-only version of a spell that normally
has somatic and material components is not nearly so simple a
matter). It may devise new spells, or verbal-only spell versions,
itself by means of experimentation. Either means of acquiring
new magics is slow and expensive, and this can often force dark
nagas into servitude to a stronger evil creature or anyone who
hires them, or into the life of an adventurer.

Dark nagas are immune to the effects of all known (normal and
magical) acids, venoms, and poisons. Some have been known to
swallow poisons and act as a courier, spitting up the dangerous
liquid when they deliver it to its destination. They can spit poison
that they are so carrying up to 10’ distant at any opponent; this
requires a successful attack roll, and takes the place of their bite,
though a naga can elect to bite and then release the poison as it
does so, combining the damage.

In battle, a dark naga may use its sting and either a spell or a
bite in the same round. If space permits, the naga can direct its
sting and bite against the same foe, but it is quite intelligent
enough to direct attacks at multiple opponents, even attacking
foes in front of and behind it, simultaneously, if caught between
them in a narrow passage.

 

 

 

 

 

Dark nagas cannot be mind-read; their ESP ability somehow
renders them immune to the ESP- like probes of others. They are
subject but resistant to charm, sleep, hold and similar
enchantment/charm spells, receiving a +2 bonus to all saving
throws against this school of magic.

Habitat/Society: Dark nagas lair in rocky places, such as ca-
verns or ruins; they like to have a home where they can hide
things (such as treasures and spellbooks), that has more than one
entry or exit, and at least one place narrow enough that they can
block it with their body, and singlehandedly fight off intruders.
Dark nagas are fond of traps, and will devise these (or hire other
creatures to install them) whenever possible.

Dark nagas tend to be loners, but can form stable family
groups of two or three; they are bisexual, and give birth to a
squirming mass of many wormlike young which they promptly
abandon to fend for themselves. Intelligent enough to know they
can prevail against few creatures in the Realms alone, dark nagas
work with other evil creatures, such as orcs, hobgoblins, drow,
phaerimm, beholders, and the like. They like to fill a “com-
mander and magical strike force” role, perhaps in a sergeant-like
intermediary rank, under a more powerful ruler — but they are
wise enough to adopt the faith, beliefs, and rules of whatever
group they join.

Ecology: Dark nagas do not willingly eat other dark nagas, but
they will eat just about anything else, both alive and dead. They
eat a few lichens and the occasional green plant, but their main
diet is meat. They especially prize hot, still-fresh blood.

Dark nagas spend their lives outwardly working with, or serv-
ing, others. Whenever possible, however, they also pursue pri-
vate goals, which may be as whimsical and odd as some human
goals (“cover this desert valley with trees,” for instance), but al-
ways include increasing their personal power by acquiring new
spells and magical items. Dark nagas are quick to plunder fallen
foe, swallowing items, scrolls, and spellbooks to spit forth later-
for all dark nagas have a bag-like internal organ that they can use
to carry things. This organ has thick, rubbery air-sac walls to
protect the naga against sharp points and the like, but it also pro-
tects the cargo against digestive juices, and has the unusual side-
effect of shielding magic from all detection spells.
   

CLIEATEPTERRAIN — Tonpeefany cy

 

FEEQUENCY ue
ReTiviny excl rectal papers 77
NO APPEARING 4 2yusall Bor
oven zante
BAMACE/ATTACK

 

Supe? Goreme Seg
vet

ne tn oon ogi sige, 4m ng omdin
ge tol da oo grip wea ta feed an pau alan,
Se tying eases ppd ith rang ange sn fo Bony
Siege pepeng tne Gru sw se enue

os acim big paso yen yng nthe
the Hs val cid spl erage at aly 4 sng gO
‘rina cateanccad) We urpetvcety as lt
coeiiod averame mast of te prey Oy ts Mune Tey ore

‘Sealy gy eg and eel op oro PS oy

‘Orpeu havestat sor sharptange bet no lar eon and
casos be ang tur fe tukad Baas or abe Ope sha
Eteprteonis bak te nei b fold seupging py art nea
cerbuttlem dragemall ners orcolaraead steel fen
he cmaturen at eat Drpas have nology or fet and cane
‘iccon fe gen y say ean Sera
buck poset errenm te onde of ane pao Some calng or
trard nstheraide ofthe olng tangs andthe ote re re
(Sing tartare is wg on abe ade at toe A orp
Sard dasitaneged knccies tot tie ait end theo
Soetely smczpe dorm fests get at an angie as
pss se ony ee ate ot body mance prey sed on one
fom pier fe fret Gom—or ft meses te seg Sega
fertom) cg sie a onnded ret persian falda
morgan Atom tact Son 16k edema

“Any wownd cased by ore conve moked [te vom bag
2 bp/rmund fener) stl se waved oad up od He we
fin’ kae fn tanbst or er stenrons ary Bat ast
Tura ortunave mgr = appind

Grau oly stumped Slot fam cts a are th
sslepror a fave olbpaed Uptaa davan an tahe ne

 

 

 

 

acu snap onsia nana ay ery
ser a bye ets tat arn 8 ip
SESS Sac at Se CTH ct ae
yee noe ae sat Tey Re Care poe oe
eT tty ly tee oda
“real cogs ea oer
EMER Snes
AR a FE oy ae ecu at
Ia nea hopes sce hy eng Sur oie
eres A ease te ny mai ce
[Seve nae Oia eek
SEINE se ey ee ee se
gen am ty we te ng
Sr te mie tpn Sea rb
of ing od Sregiy tr nasa age oe
oxen ol eng fae ae ne oe

HabrtSecety Org ar nsecky plane suchas caverns or
fai and hun ape, rllng acrblond er planer ov
fo ot eta eb ets ecole ven

‘rpu aint ne oh or nae and cn comment ty
thes of ther bind empiaing slid range mle
Sue Meany aberrant
iy rion them mmune to chvtn, sugprnon dation, 29d
al age snd uur mena paves soil

‘cpa te im mate por preduamg fee of 14 hes,
sai see an barge Yo I HO wate 23/1 weep
{heusummers Ob ptng roman wah ther par frm
fei ain, a po ten Yr sod ae,
‘Seoliet ong alprng him muted pars sod Ty oo fod
Ser ope i Sing ray sd Hm ued es ot

Ecology Suruce dueling cepey pry onsheep cate many
rail Stubre aang 4 Gotabd ttdon er dger, Pal
fed ors) ge bre sod en Suberucean ary pet
Sind dew dod ager walle
Peryton

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any/ Mountains
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Nest
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average (10)
TREASURE: B
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 2-8
ARMOR CLASS: 7
MOVEMENT: 12, FI 21 (C)
HIT DICE: 4

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 4-16

SPECIAL ATTACKS: +2 to attack roll
SPECIAL DEFENSES: +1 or better to hit
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (5’ tall)
MORALE: Champion (16)
XP VALUE: 270

High above the mountains and rocky hills of most lands flies a
sharp-eyed monster known as the peryton. Intelligent, patient,
and malevolent, it waits for prey whose heart it might pluck out.

The peryton resembles a giant, dark-green eagle, save that the
head is that of a blue-black stag, its horns glittering black as ob-
sidian, its eyes glowing a dull red-orange. The chest feathers of a
male peryton are light blue; those of the female are drab brown.
Perytons normally cast the shadows of adult human beings rather
than those of their own forms.

A peryton chooses not to adorn itself with trinkets, nor arm it-
self with any weapons. Its language is a collection of roars and
screeches, and always sounds as if the peryton were either injured
or enraged. Some creatures with keen senses of smell claim that a
peryton smells like a human, while others are filled with an un-
reasoning fear of the monster upon catching first scent.

Combat: A peryton is only secondarily interested in prey for
food. Its main interest in humans and similar creatures is the
prey’s heart. It is unnaturally accurate in combat. In game terms,
a peryton receives a +2 bonus to its attack roll.

It attacks with its sharp horns, as its claws are too weak to use
in melee. When a peryton chooses a target for combat, it locks it-
self into a duel that almost always ends in either the peryton’s
death or that of its target. A peryton never switches targets in
combat, no matter the tactical situation. On rare occasions, a
peryton can be driven off, but it will stalk its prey to return at a
later time.

Perytons are immune to all weapons but those of at least +1
enchantment.

Some perytons choose to swoop at a target. This attack form
involves the peryton climbing several hundred feet and then

 

| ess oS
NS ws

ASN S

(S

4, \

a a a
famed in

SY

y

 

 

 

 

plunging at the target. This attack is made at an additional +2
bonus to the attack roll. If the attack succeeds, the peryton deliv-
ers double damage. This is an extreme maneuver, that the peryton
will attempt only if a combat is going poorly, or it believes it has a
chance to surprise its prey.

Another common tactic is for the peryton to grapple a human-
sized target and then lift off with the prey in tow. The peryton
climbs rapidly enough that most targets do not react until they
are at least 100 feet in the air, facing a 10d6 plummet if they man-
age to escape the peryton’s grasp.

Habitat/Society: Perytons lair in caves high upon cliffs or in
mountain peaks. They dwell in nests of 2d4 creatures, each nest
independent of any other, and no two nests within several miles
of one another, excepting unusual circumstances (such as a dwar-
ven community living in the mountains and providing plentiful
prey).

Perytons sometimes take humans and similar creatures alive
and hold them prisoner in their nests until needed as food (90%
likely for nonhumans, 25% the case for humans) or for reproduc-
tive needs (see below). From these visitors, the peryton nests may
have treasure scattered about. Also scattered about are un-
hatched eggs, numbering 1d4.

Ecology: The peryton is a predator, with no natural enemies
(few could pierce its magically resistant skin). Its prey is human-
oids, especially humans. A female peryton requires a fresh, beat-
ing heart to reproduce, and human hearts are the preferred type.
Once a peryton has eaten a heart, its shadow changes into that of
its normal form and the creature is fertile for 3d6 hours.
Unhatched peryton eggs can be sold for 10d12 gp apiece.
Phantom

au

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any/Land
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Nil
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1
ARMOR CLASS: Nil
MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: Nil
THACO: Nil

NO. OF ATTACKS: Nil
DAMAGE/ATTACK: Nil
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Fear
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below
SIZE: Varies, usually M
MORALE: Nil

XP VALUE: Nil

Phantoms are images left behind by a particularly strong death
trauma. A phantom is like a three-dimensional motion picture
image filmed at the time of a character’s death, in the area where
he died.

The standard phantom may appear as almost anything. It often
appears as the character who experienced the trauma—a trans-
parent image re-enacting the death scene. Alternatively, it could
represent that which was foremost on the victim’s mind at the
time of death, whether an attacker, or perhaps some goal left un-
fulfilled. A phantom is experienced in faded colors, and by all
senses.

Combat: It is difficult to fight a phantom; they are merely im-
ages and have no power to directly cause harm. They cannot
themselves be harmed. Swinging weapons or casting spells into
the area of the image does not interfere with the projection, and it
cannot be reasoned with. A phantom is not intelligent and does
not exist for any purpose; tracking down the victim’s killer or
completing a quest does not get rid of the phantom.

Phantoms are often mistaken for ghosts, haunts, or groaning
spirits, but they may not be turned as undead. Only the priest
spell remove curse, cast at 12th level or higher, can dispel a phan-
tom.

Although a phantom cannot directly harm a viewer, it is an es-
sence of magic that calls up a superstitious awe in anyone who
views it. The enchantment is such that the phantom affects both
the mind and the senses of the observer. Creatures without minds
(such as undead) are immune to the phantom’s effects, as are
those rare beings who are somehow unable to experience a phan-
tom (since the phantom is present to all senses, blindness is not
normally enough protection against one).

Characters witnessing a phantom must roll a successful saving
throw vs. death magic, with a -2 penalty, or immediately panic
and run away as per the effects of a fear spell. Particularly vivid
phantoms may require those who fail this saving throw to make a
system shock roll, with a +10% bonus to the roll. Failure on this
roll results in death for the unfortunate viewer. Such a character
can be raised normally, however.

There are other difficulties with the fear effect, of course, not

 

YY

 

 

 

 

the least of which is that the cause of the phantom’s death might
still be around. Even after centuries, traps and undead monsters
can be just as effective and deadly, and a panicked run is usually
not the best position to take when encountering them.

Of course, a phantom may provide characters with important
information, either forewarning careful characters of an upcom-
ing danger, or illustrating what became of some item or person.

There is a slight chance that a character’s death may engender a
phantom. This chance should be minuscule to nonexistent for 0-
level or very low-level characters or for those who were expecting
to die, such as characters dying of natural causes or in war. How-
ever, characters of 4th level or above, dying suddenly or by sur-
prise, might have a 1-2% chance. If those characters were on an
important mission or task, or were subject to geas or quest spells,
this chance might rise to 5-6% percent. The percentage chance for
generating a phantom should never be higher than the level of the
character at the time of death. (Therefore, characters killed by
energy-draining undead rarely produce phantoms.) It is up to the
DM to decide what the precise image presents.

A character who is murdered and generates a phantom may
also return as a revenant.

There are nonstandard types of phantoms that affect only one
of the senses. Often, these are purely visual images, but they can
also manifest themselves as sounds (explosions, moaning, or
quiet whispering) or smells. Most of these phantoms require sav-
ing throws, but the effects of failure may differ. A gloomy whis-
pering of danger might produce despair (as per the symbol spells)
effects. A foul stench might induce the retching effects of a ghast.
Suffocating pressure, temperature extremes, the sounds of a
swarm of bats, might all carry with them differing consequences
of failing the saving throw.

Of greater concern, there are some phantoms that are actually
evil, created when powerful evil creatures from other planes are
“slain” (forced to return to their home planes) in the Prime Mate-
rial plane. These phantoms appear as per the evil creature’s will
35% of the time, and can seriously misinform or endanger those it
meets. These phantoms can be detected with a detect evil spell;
dispel evil can neutralize the phantom for a number of turns equal
to the caster’s level.
Plant, Carnivorous

ey NOx

 

aN

 

 

 

 

Retch Plant Snapper-Saw Thornslinger
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any/ Warm land Any/Land Any/Land
FREQUENCY: Rare Very rare Rare
ORGANIZATION: Clusters Solitary Clusters
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any Any
DIET: Nutrients Carnivore Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Non- (0) Non- (0) Non- (0)
TREASURE: Nil Nil Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Neutral Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 2-20 1-2 3-12
ARMOR CLASS: 8 4/7/9 8
MOVEMENT: 0 0 0
HIT DICE: 5-8 5 4
THACO: 5-6 HD: 15 15 See below
7-8 HD: 13
NO. OF ATTACKS: See below 3-6 1 (Volley)
DAMAGE/ATTACK: Nil 2-5 2-8
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below Trapping Nil
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below Nil Adhesive dew
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil Nil Nil

SIZE: H (20' tall)
MORALE: Average (8-10)
XP VALUE:

Retch Plant (Globe Palm)

The retch plant, or globe palm, appears to be a typical palm tree,
except that each constantly has 1d4 +4 globe-like, coconut-sized
fruit growing at its top. Each globe is membranous, taut, and
blue, violet, or lilac in color.

Walking under a retch plant makes it 20% likely that one of its
globes falls. If there is solid contact with a tree trunk-such as
banging against, running into, or climbing it—1d4 + 1 of the noi-
some fruit plop down. Randomly choose the character(s) at-
tacked; he is AC 10 against this attack. When the globes strike,
they burst, and a nauseating fluid is splashed over a five-foot ra-
dius. Those who are between five and nine feet have a 25%
chance of being splashed. The sticky, foul fluid causes creatures
splashed to vomit and retch for the next three rounds. In addition
to being nauseated, for six turns thereafter victims are at 50% of
normal Strength. No saving throw is allowed against either effect
of the fluid.

Creatures splashed must be washed in alcohol (wine, beer,
brandy, etc.) or they are much more likely to attract carnivores in
the area. This has the effect of doubling the normal frequency of
encounter checks, as well as doubling the probabilities of actual
encounters. The odor is discernible within a 50-foot radius and it
persists for 1d4 hours unless removed as above.

Snapper-Saw (Forester’s Bane)

The snapper-saw plant, or forester’s bane, is a dark green, low-
growing shrub. Broad, tough leaves with sinewy ribs extend five
to seven feet from the central plant. The bushy center hides 1d4 +
2 purple stalks with saw-toothed edges.

When a creature steps on or near the tough leaves, these leaves
snap shut around it, holding it fast. Trapping is automatic and
subjects the victim to all the stalks, which immediately begin to
saw away at the captured prey. On successive rounds the victim
may make a strength check to pull away and escape further at-
tacks.

H (15’ radius)
Steady (11-12)
Variable 420

M @ radius)
Average (8-10)
175

In addition to the damage that the main plant can withstand,
leaves can sustain 1d8 + 8 points of damage and stalks 1d8 + 16
points before being severed. Lost leaves and stalks grow back in
2d4 weeks unless the central plant is slain.

The bushy central plant grows luscious-smelling berries of
white, greenish, golden, or bright yellow color. They are large,
plump, and delicious, being very nutritious and rich in protein.

Thornslinger

Thornslingers are carnivorous, spidery-white plants with dew-
covered, pale-yellow blossoms. They average about eight feet in
diameter and lie very close to the ground.

Thornslingers attack living creatures by slinging 2d4 thorns at
them. Each thorn has a range of 30 feet and causes 1 point of dam-
age. Since the thorns are thrown in a spread pattern at the in-
tended target, being hit by one or more thorns is automatic.
Damage from the thorns, therefore, is always simply 2d4 points.
Since the shower of thorns is their only means of defense,
thornslingers are often found in out-of-the-way places, such as
pits, inaccessible caves, and growing on brick or stone walls.
They are always found in clusters of 3d4 plants, and all
thornslingers have virtually inexhaustible supplies of thorns to
hurl.

The central plant core of a thornslinger is covered by a strong
adhesive dew. Character with less than 13 Strengths are held im-
mobile until freed or digested. Characters with Strengths greater
than or equal to 13 can break free in 1d4 rounds. Once a victim is
caught, digestive juices cause 1d3 points of damage per round to
him.

Thornslingers are not very flammable, but flame causes nor-
mal damage. Open flame is extinguished after one round and oil
burns for only two rounds.
oe ae ae Moy = Peas

FORGOMEN REALINS

 

Plant, Carnivorous

_ n ___ wre

 

 

 

Vine, Viper Weed, Whip- Weed, Wither-
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical / Forests Non-arctic/ Dark Non-arctic/ Ruins
FREQUENCY: Rare Uncommon Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Clusters Solitary Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any Any
DIET: Carnivore Omnivore Special
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7) Semi- (2-4) Non- (0)
TREASURE: Nil Nil Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Neutral Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1-10 1-2 1
ARMOR CLASS: 8 6/4 8
MOVEMENT: 3 3 0
HIT DICE: 4 4 3-6
THACO: 17 17 3-4 HD: 17

5-6 HD: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 L Variable
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4 1-10/1-10 Nil
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Paralysis, constriction Frenzy Dexterity drain
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below Nil Smoke
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil Nil Nil
SIZE: L (20'-50' long) Variable Variable
MORALE: Elite (13-14) Average (8-10) Average (8-10)
XP VALUE: 270 175 270
Viper Vine Its need to embed its roots into the earth is not fully under-

Viper vines are thick (three inches in diameter), rope-like vines
that are brownish green in color. They are a type of carnivorous
plant indigenous to tropical forests, 90% indistinguishable from
normal vines.

Viper vines hang from trees, trailing their ends on the ground
to snare unwary animals. They have two forms of attack. The
first is constriction as they wrap around their victim, much like
snakes, causing 1d4 points of damage per round. A successful
bend bars/lift gates roll is required to free oneself from the con-
striction.

The second attack is a paralyzing poison exuded from the skin
onto the ensnared creature (successful saving throw vs. poison to
avoid). Viper vines can control this poison, generally not using it
until after having constricted their victim for 1d4 rounds. The pa-
ralysis lasts for 2d4 rounds.

Viper vines are immune to all blunt weapons.

Whipweed

A whipweed has two stalks, thin and whip-like with a few ap-
pendages that look like small leaves. When fully grown, the
stalks are up to 15 feet long, though smaller specimens are just as
common. The stalks are connected to a spheroidal base that con-
tains a small brain and is equipped with eight small legs; the crea-
ture is thus capable of limited movement and can pull the
root-like appendages up underneath itself to permit locomotion.

A whipweed attacks anything that moves within range of its
stalks, each stalk hitting as a monster with 4 Hit Dice and capable
of inflicting 1d10 points of damage. The stalks will attack two dif-
ferent victims if two are in range. Damage inflicted upon the
stalks do not count toward the body’s hit point total.

If the body is destroyed (reduced to 0 hit points or below) the
whipweed dies but the stalks go into a mad frenzy for one round
before they go inert. During this time they attack three times each
and each attack inflicts double the normal damage if successful.

The whipweed hates sunlight, so it is usually found under-
ground or in the heart of deep forest. It draws its sustenance from
the remains of animal prey, though it has no mouth and its food
appears to be absorbed by the stalks and transferred internally to
the body.

stood. It is certain that the creature can survive apparently indefi-
nitely in rocky areas containing virtually no soil, and a small
crevice in a rock appears to be quite sufficient to cater to its need
to root from time to time.

This strange creature was originally named in the belief that
was a plant; though it displays behavior that supports this theory,
it also has many qualities that are not plant-like (though druidical
spells relating to plants affect it).

Witherweed

This weed appears as a dried-out patch of grass or weeds approxi-
mately 20 feet square (3 Hit Dice). Weeds twice this size have been
found, and larger ones are theoretically possible (possessing 4, 5,
or even 6 Hit Dice).

The witherweed attacks with its many equally spaced fronds.
An average specimen has 1d12 + 12 so positioned that at least one
frond can attack each person confronting it. A frond hit drains
1d4 Dexterity points from its victim. A successful saving throw
vs. poison cuts in half the number of points of Dexterity lost. Any
victim drained of the maximum of 4 Dexterity points in a single
hit also suffers a nervous seizure—total collapse for two rounds,
followed by a further five rounds during which he attacks with a
-2 penalty to his attack rolls and moves at 75% of his normal
rate. He loses all Dexterity bonuses during this seven-round per-
iod.

A victim becomes incapacitated if his Dexterity is reduced be-
low 3, and dies if it is reduced to 0 or below. Half of the Dexterity
points lost are recovered by surviving victims naturally at the
rate of 1 per day, but the remainder can only be regained by the
casting of a cure disease spell on the victim.

The witherweed is dry and is therefore easily burned, but it
produces a toxic smoke while burning. Anyone inhaling the
smoke must roll a successful saving throw vs. poison or die in 1d4
rounds. The fire burns and the smoke streams forth for one round
per square foot of vegetation. Only a strong wind blows the
heavy, oily smoke away. Otherwise it forms a cloud of volume
equal to nine times the area of the witherweed and takes at least
four hours to dissipate.
Plant, Carnivorous

 

 

 

 

Willow, Black

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any/ Any
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low to Very (5-12)
TREASURE: Incidental
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: 1
ARMOR CLASS: 2
MOVEMENT: %
HIT DICE: 12-19
THACO: 12 HD: 9
13-14 HD: 7
15-19 HD: 5
NO. OF ATTACKS: 7-12
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Drowsiness aura
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Regeneration
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: L (6'-9' diam. trunk)
MORALE: Fearless (19-20)
XP VALUE: Variable

The black willow is a mobile, sentient tree of evil disposition. It is
90% unlikely that a creature will recognize a black willow as
such, for they can alter their trunks and limbs to appear as normal
trees of the various willow sorts. Sometimes they will have
smooth trunks and broad, inviting limbs. Other times they will
show safe-looking trunk cavities at their base or high on their up-
per trunk. Of course, treants can spot black willows instantly, but
even druids cannot do so without magical aid (such as locate
plants, for example).

Combat: A black willow’s normal attack is with lashing, whip-
like branches that cause 1d4 points of damage each, but it has two
special attack forms, one of which is generally employed earlier.
If a creature has climbed out on a safe-looking limb, the black wil-
low generates an aura of drowsiness within a 20-foot radius,
making tired creatures fall into natural sleep. No saving throw is
granted for creatures that are already going to sleep (like travelers
resting or adventurers camping for the night), but active creatures
(like foraging animals and adventurers just passing through) get a
saving throw vs. spell to avoid falling asleep. Note that no spell is
actually cast, and no offensive action is taken by the black willow
during this drowsiness attempt, so characters who save feel
slightly tired and then press on. Creatures who fail the saving
throw, or who are already tired, do not drop to the ground, but
rather feel compelled to stop and rest for a while.

A hole then opens underneath such victims, and one or more of
them are taken into a hollow limb. The limb then tilts to slide
them into the trunk cavity. The trunk's safe-looking openings are
also used to close and trap the victims in the digestive cavity of
the trunk.

The stomach is coated with sticky, nonflammable sap. Diges-
tive sap then oozes up from the roots, filling the cavity at a rate of
one foot per ten rounds until the entire eight-foot cavity is filled.
The juice is acidic and inflicts 1d4 points of damage per round un-

 

 

 

 

til death occurs. Complete digestion is indicated when the victim
reaches -20 or more hit points; any attempt at resurrection is
thereafter impossible.

Creatures trapped inside the stomach can employ only short,
sharp weapons because of the confined space. It’s impossible to
cast spells from within a black widow, unless the caster is small
sized or smaller. Maximum normal damage is only 1 point per
round, but magical and Strength bonuses add to this. Therefore,
rescue, if any, must usually come from outside.

A black willow regenerates at the rate of 1 point per turn and is
immune to electrical attacks only if its roots are grounded firmly.

Habitat/Society: Although it usually inhabits areas where nor-
mal willows grow, the black willow can be found anywhere a tree
is believable, including underground lakes, abandoned ruins, and
so forth. A few black willows have been discovered by accident in
the sacred groves of druids, but only if the druid has been lax in
his duties or has remained away from his sanctum for a very long
time (possibly adventuring).

Ecology: The black willow gets only a portion of its nourish-
ment from sun, air, water, and earth. The monster is aggressively
camivorous, relishing elves, gnomes, and humans particularly.
Treasure of any sort is sometimes found buried beneath this tree
monster, along with bones and other immediately indigestible
matter. Of course, this assumes victims have treasure that weak
acid (+4 bonus to saving throws) could not digest. It also as-
sumes the black willow has stayed in a locale for a period of
weeks (very likely unless pickings have been poor recently). It is
quite possible that the black willow is either a little-understood
offshoot of the treants, or an evil perversion of the quickwood.
Even druids are not sure one way or the other, and they spend
many long hours debating such things whenever another black
willow is sighted or suspected.

 
Ring-worm

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any

 

 

 

 

 

FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Special
INTELLIGENCE: Non (0)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1
ARMOR CLASS: 2
MOVEMENT: 1

HIT DICE: 1 hp
THACO: N/A

NO. OF ATTACKS: Nil
DAMAGE/ATTACK: Nil
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

 

SIZE: T (1"-2" long)
MORALE: Special
XP VALUE: 35

If a party of adventurers finds a ring-worm, they see a plain gold
ring. It can be worn as a ring and radiates an aura of weak magic.
If an identify spell is cast on the ring, it appears to be a ring of
protection +1.

When worn, the ring-worm feeds on the magical energy used
by the wearer. If a mage wears a ring-worm, he loses one spell
level per day that he wears the ring. For example, he loses one
spell level the first day, two spell levels the second day, and so on.
The wizard simply forgets these spells immediately after memo-
rizing them. The forgotten spells are randomly determined.

If the ring-worm is worn by a non-magic user or has consumed
all of a wizard's spells, it then steals magic from any magic items
the person is carrying. Because the magic items are weakened by
magical energy draining, there is an increased chance that they
fail to work. This chance is a cumulative 10% per day the ring-
worm has been worn by the character.

When the wearer realizes that his magic is failing, he may real-
ize his new “ring” is responsible. If another detect magic is used
on the ring, it shows a stronger magical aura from the magical
energy consumed by the worm.

If the victim attempts to remove the ring, he finds that it has
bonded with his skin. Spells such as remove curse, heal, and all
cure spells do not remove the ring-worm. Only a successful dis-
pel magic spell allows the ring-worm to be removed. Consider
the ring-worm to resist at 6th level, plus one level for every three
spell levels or “pluses” drained.

 

 

 

After the worm is removed or killed, the victim’s magic items
return to normal in 1-6 turns. Spells may be memorized as usual
the following day.

Casabat: If the ring-worm is attacked with fire, it detaches itself
and tries to escape. If a successful flame attack is made against
the worm, it dies automatically. When the worm is not in the
form of a ring, only bladed weapons enchanted to at least +2 or
better can harm it.

Habhai/Society: A ring-worm finds a home where there is a food
supply. For this reason, it prefers to live in the city where it might
find many magic users in a relatively small area. Ring-worms are
also found in areas where adventurers frequently can be found,
such as dungeons or even taverns. Usually these worms found
their homes when their previous “hosts” discovered the true na-
ture of the worms.

A breeding pair of ring-worms can lay 10-50 eggs. When the
eggs hatch, the worms scatter and live solitary lives. It is ex-
tremely unlikely that a character would ever find more than one
ring-worm at a time.

Ecology: Because of the ring-worm’s need for and attraction to
magic, they are easily lured into traps. It has been rumored that
some people have captured the worms for use against magical
foes.
Rohch

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Wood Killer Swamp Dark
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any forest Any forest Any swamp Tropical/subtropical
FREQUENCY: Uncommon Uncommon Rare Rare
ORGANIZATION: Pack Pack Pack Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any Any Night
DIET: Omnivore Omnivore Omnivore Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Semi Semi Low Semi
TREASURE: Nil Nil Nil ],K,L,M,N
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Neutral Neutral Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: 10-100 4-40 1-12 1-6
ARMOR CLASS: 10 8 5 2
MOVEMENT: 15 15 12,Sw 9 12
HIT DICE: 1 3 4 8
THACO: 19 17 17 13
NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 3 3 6
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-2/1-2/1-2 1-4/1-4/1-4 1-6/1-6/1-6 1-6/1-6/1-6/1-6/1-6/1-6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil Nil Nil Disease
SPECIAL DEFENSES: +2 or better weapon to

hit
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil Nil Nil Nil
SIZE: T (1' long) T (1' long) T (2’ long) S (3' long)
MORALE: Average Average Elite Champion
XP VALUE: 15 65 120 2,000

Rohches are the result of a horrid magical experiment, the cross-
breeding of wolves and beetles. No two rohches look the same,
although each is horrid and displays insect and animal features.
Rohches have four to eight legs in addition to two claws, which
extend from the creature’s shoulders. A dark rohch has six claws
which extend from various points on the creature’s back.

The creatures have a mix of tough carapace covering their
bodies. Tufts of fur jut from parts of their legs. Their heads ap-
pear wolf-like, with beetle pincers protruding from the lower jaw
and a carapace covering the top of their skull.

Combat: Rohches are naturally vicious, attacking almost any-
thing in sight that is the same size or smaller than themselves, or
attacking humans and demi-humans in small numbers. The
rohches attack simply for food, and they seem to frequently be
hungry. They notice their prey through vibrations in the ground
and by smell. Their keen wolflike senses are acute.

When encountered in numbers, rohches swarm over their vic-
tims, first attacking any exposed skin. Once a victim is dead,
they take their time, burrowing beneath armor and under clothes
to get at the flesh.

Rohches do not willingly leave a victim until it has been re-
duced to bones. After a pack of rohches has feasted, they do not
eat again for two to six hours.

A chittering noise typically precedes rohches into battle. This
noise is caused by their pincers rubbing together in excitement
over the prospect of food.

Habitat/Society: For the most part, rohches are social creatures,
living in packs and hunting together. There is a distinct social or-
der among the creatures, with each rohch knowing what is ex-
pected of it.

They typically lair in burrows underground that had been oc-
cupied by rabbits or foxes the rohches swarmed. Large packs of
rohches have been found in caves. Polished white skeletons are
usually strewn throughout their homes.

Ecology: Rohches help keep the populations of rats and other
small animals in check. However, they are a bane to livestock
farms.

Because of their carapace and thick fur, they are able to with-
stand some extremes in climate. Some rohches have been found
in the northern reaches. However, the majority of rohches prefer
wooded temperate to tropical lands.

Rohches have many predators. Carnivorous apes and ba-
boons seem especially fond of their flesh. And communities of
gnomes have been known to hunt the creatures, using their cara-
paces for armor and their meat for food.

Wood: The most common form of rohch, the wood rohch is
found in large packs, most frequently in temperate forests. They
attack with two front claws and a pincer bite.

Killer: Also a fairly common rohch, the killer is more dangerous
and deadly. It is larger, more vicious, and prefers the taste of hu-
man and demi-human flesh to other mammals. Its attack meth-
ods are similar to the wood rohch; however, their claws are larger
and inflict more damage.

Swamp: These horrid rohches have adapted to marshes and
swamps, preying on the animals and humans who cross their
paths. They can stay submerged for up to five minutes at a time,
surfacing to strike.

Dark: The most feared of the rohches is the dark, or death rohch,
as some people have come to call them. These are the largest of
the wolf-insect crossbreeds and the most horrid. Their large cara-
paces are thick. They have six claws instead of two, and their
pincers are sharp. Victims bitten by a dark rohch’s pincers must
successfully save vs. poison or contract a debilitating disease
within 1-4 rounds.
Sand Cat

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Desert or dry steppe
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Den
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Animal (1)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1-4

ARMOR CLASS: 8
MOVEMENT: 15

HIT DICE: 1+1

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4/ 1-3/ 1-3
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Rear claws 1-2, surprise
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Surprise
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: 5 (2’-3’)
MORALE: Average (8- 10)
XP VALUE: 120

The sand cat is a small desert feline that preys on many
of the small mammals of the desert and dry steppe re-
gions. Slightly larger than a regular house cat, it is a
sandy brown color. The ears are long and pointed, ending
in a long, white tuft. The tip of the tail is a darker brown
than the rest of the body.

Combat: Although the sand cat is a predator, its prey is
not man or other humanoid creatures. It will not attack a
person under normal circumstances. However, if forced
to fight (cornered, etc.), it attacks savagely. The sand cat
is a small and stealthy creature and so applies a -1 to all
opponents’ surprise rolls. At the same time, its keen
senses make it very hard to surprise, giving it a + 1 on all
surprise rolls.

When the cat attacks, it springs toward its target. The
sand cat can leap 5 feet upward and 10 feet forward, with
a running start. It strikes with both front claws. If both of
these hit, the rear claws automatically rake the victim for
1-2 points damage each. Thereafter it will bat and bite as
much as possible.

The sand cat seldom fights to the death, instead trying
to escape any opponent stronger than it. However, a
mother will not abandon her young unless it is to lure an
attacker away. If the sand cat is defending its young, it
gains a +1 on its THACO and damage rolls.

Habitat/Society: The sand cat lives in a small family
group called a den. Depending on the time of year, the
den will have two to seven individuals: two adults and kit-
tens. Sand cats mate for a single season and the male re-
mains with the female until the young are grown, which
takes about 10 months to a year.

The sand cat makes its lair in a small cave, sheltered
overhang, or abandoned burrow. The latter is preferred if
there is one available. The lair is normally occupied only
while there are young to be raised. During this time, one
adult always remains near the kittens.

Sand cats are very territorial. They hunt over a range of
5 to 10 square miles. They are nighttime predators and
mostly bring down small mammals. They are seldom a
threat to larger creatures.

 

 

 

 

 

Ecology: The sand cat is a natural force in the local ecol-
ogy, keeping down the numbers of small vermin in a re-
gion. Unfortunately, the sand cat is also valued by
humans. The kittens, if taken young enough, can be
trained. Among the tribes of the desert and steppe, sand
cats trained to hunt are the gifts of sheiks and khans.
These animals can run down hares and other game for
their masters. Others are sold to traders, who in turn sell
the little cats in the cities. Here they are raised as pets—
dangerous and savage little pets. A sand cat kitten is eas-
ily worth 500 to 2,000 gold pieces.
Saurial

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FinheadsB Bladebacks Flyers Hornheads
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Jungle Jungle Jungle/ mountain Jungle
FREQUENCY: Very rare Very rare Very rare Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Community Community Community Community
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day Day Day Day
DIET: Omnivore Vegetarian Carnivore Vegetarian
INTELLIGENCE: Verv Very Very Very
TREASURE: Nil Nil Nil Nil
ALIGNMENT: Any Any Any Any
NO. APPEARING: 1-6 1-4 2-8 1-2
ARMOR CLASS: 5 4 6 4
MOVEMENT: 12 4 6 FI 24 (C) 10
HIT DICE: 2 2 2 4
THACO: 19 19 19 17
NO. OF ATTACKS: lor2 lor3 lor3 lor3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: By weapon By weapon By weapon By weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below See below See below See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below See below See below See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil Nil Nil Nil
SIZE: M (5’ tall) L (7' tall) S (3' tall) L (10' tall)
MORALE: Steady (12) Steady (12) Average (10) Elite (14)
XP VALUE: 35 35 65 120

Saurials are intelligent bipedal lizards descended from creatures
similar to dinosaurs. Saurials are not native to the Realms, but
originate from an alternate Prime Material Plane. Most saurials
now in the Realms were kidnapped from their homes and
brought to the Realms as slaves by the evil god Moander. Upon
Moander’s death, these saurials elected to remain in the Realms
and make it their home. They live in a single village in the Lost
Vale in the Desertsmouth Mountains east of Anauroch. They are
still recovering physically and spiritually from the deprivations
they suffered under Moander, so very few saurials travel far from
the shelter of the Lost Vale, though this may change with the
passing of the years and as their numbers increase.

There are many different races of saurials, but only finheads,
bladebacks, flyers, and hornheads are currently in the Realms.
These are the names provided by the natives of the Realms to
these newcomers. The saurials’ own names are a combination of
noises and scents which do not translate well into mammalian
speech.

All four races have brightly colored scales, sharp claws, and
tails, but their body shapes otherwise vary considerably. A
finhead is nearly human in shape, though shorter than most hu-
mans, with a tail just over half its body length and a pronounced
fin on its head. A bladeback is taller and stockier with a series of
large, sharp scales which extend from the top of its head, down
its spine and along its nearly body-length tail. A flyer has a deli-
cate frame, with smaller legs, a shorter tail and a flap of scale-
covered flesh beneath each arm which serve as wings. So
although ungainly on foot, a flyer is extremely graceful when air-
borne. A hornhead is a giant beast with a tail longer than its own
body and sharp horns protruding both from its head and the
great bony plate which protects its neck. All four of these races
have scales of some shade of green and their back scales are
mixed with yellow scales in patterns unique to each individual.
Flyers sometimes feature a bolder red splotch around their necks.
Only rarely is a pure white saurial born in each race.

All saurials have true infravision. They can detect heat wave-
lengths with their eyes, but they cannot see a cold object in the
dark. Although they are not cold-blooded like true lizards,
saurials are not as efficient at keeping their blood warm as are
Realms mammals. If exposed too long to freezing air, saurials go
into a torpor called cold sleep. They fall asleep and their breath-

ing slows until they may even appear dead. A saurial’s ability to
resist the cold sleep is based on its size. A 3-foot flyer succumbs
to the cold sleep in 3 turns, while a 5-foot finhead succumbs in 5
turns, and so forth. If the saurial is bundled in insulating cloth-
ing, these times are doubled. A saurial in cold sleep returns to
consciousness within an hour or two if it is brought to a warm
place. A saurial left exposed to freezing weather for more than a
day dies.

Por daily activities saurials do not generally wear more than
loin cloths and simple, loose cloaks as long as they are in a tropi-
cal climate. They do, however, wear ornate robes of fabric and
animal hides for ceremonial occasions. They decorate their
homes with wall hangings and floor coverings. Saurials are not
comfortable in armor. To avoid the cold sleep saurials bundle up
in colder regions. Tattoos are common, particularly among spell-
casters, and depending on their race, saurial mages either carve
special symbols into the bony plates of their body or tattoo them
into their scales.

Saurials do not speak any Realms languages; indeed, to most
humans they do not seem to speak at all, since their voices are
pitched too high to be heard without magic. The emotions ac-
companying their words are emitted as scents that humans can
often detect, so a human familiar with the saurials can often tell
what one is feeling without knowing what one is saying. Saurials
can hear human speech, but so far, none have learned the lan-
guage, although many of their spellcasters can use magic to do
so. One of their number, the paladin Dragonbait, understands
Common because of his magical bond with the sellsword Alias of
Westgate. The saurials’ form of writing is to carve lines on sticks,
which is used mostly for magic and important records.

Combat: Saurials, like humans, fight with a variety of weapons,
mainly determined by their character class. For example, spell-
casters use magic, fighters use blades and missile weapons, and
clerics favor blunt weapons or magic. Saurial-crafted blades
have shorter grips and favor barb-like tips. Humans not used to
such weapons suffer a -1 attack penalty with saurial blades, and
saurials suffer a -1 attack penalty with human weapons.

If unarmed and severely pressed, saurials resort to ancient
modes of attack. Finheads claw with both hands (1d3/1d3) or use
their thick tail as a whip (1d2). Bladebacks use both claws (1d4/
Saurial

 

1d4) and swing at any rear attacker with their razored tail (1d6).
Flyers claw and bite (1d2/1d2,1d2). Hornheads either claw (1d4/
1d4) and swing their tail (2d4) or charge with their horns (2d6).

Saurial Armor Class is as listed for each of the individual
races, and is a result of their own thick natural hides. Saurial Ar-
mor Class can be improved by means of armor, though this is an
alien concept to saurials, and such armor would need to be
custom-made for the creatures. Saurial Armor Class would only
be improved if the Armor Class would be higher than the
saurial’s natural Armor Class. So a finback in leather armor
would gain no benefit. Exceptional saurials have the same limita-
tions as their character class. Saurial mages do not wear armor,
and saurial thieves would be limited to the protection of leather
armor, which would be insufficient for their protection and as
such not used.

Because of the nature of the saurial senses, all saurials receive a
+2 saving throw bonus against sound-based attacks, such as a
harpy’s charm or a shout spell. They are more susceptible to gas-
based attacks, including poison gas and cloudkill spells, and as
such have a -2 penalty on all saving throws against these attack
forms.

Habitat and Society: The adult saurials of the Lost Vale number
110 and consider themselves one tribe, although they are made
up of different races. Leading and protecting this tribe are a
hornhead wizard of 14th level named Grypht, Grypht’s three ap-
prentices, a bladeback priest of 7th level named Sweetleaf, who
worships Chauntea in lieu of his own goddess of the harvest, and
Sweetleaf’s five acolytes. The renowned finhead paladin Dragon-
bait visits the valley as often as his adventures allow. The tribe’s
other adventurers were killed battling Moander in their original
plane. The remaining members are villagers without adventuring
skills. Most are farmers and hunters. There are weavers, carpen-
ters, a stonemason, a blacksmith, and musicians among their
numbers. Moander killed all their young but 20 more saurials
have hatched since the evil god's death. The adults have worked
hard to build their new village and to restore order, but they are
still somber after their ordeal. They look for the next generation
to bring joy back into their lives. The saurials harvest and gather
enough food and keep warm and dry in small thatched huts, but
they prefer solid single family dwellings of stone or wood. One
by one, each family is building a home, and gradually adding
extra rooms onto them.

This outpost is the sole known established domain of saurials
in the Realms. However, once the gap between the Realms and
the saurials’ home plane has been breeched, there is a chance that
more saurials may appear in Faerun, or that adventurers from
this dimension may find their way to the saurial homeworld.

Saurials live in mixed groups with little conflict among the
races, unlike the mammals of the Realms, which seem to have
different nations for elves, dwarves, and men. Saurials think of
themselves as saurials first, and their sub-race second, and recog-
nize that the other races of saurials have as much to contribute to
their community as their own race, if not more. Saurial com-
munities consist of all types of the various races, though there
tends to be fewer of the larger hornheads and bladebacks because
of the food limitations. Even communities with one race of
saurials treat all other races as brethren. The Realms domain of
the Lost Vale has primarily finbacks, but also has a large number
of flyers, and a smattering of bladebacks and hornheads, includ-
ing their leader, Grypht.

The listed statistics are for common saurials, but like the races

of the Realms, these creatures have a number of exceptional indi-
viduals whose abilities closely resemble those of exceptional
fighters, priests, mages, and thieves. In random encounters out-
side the Lost Vale, for every ten “common” saurials encountered
there is an individual of exceptional ability, either a fighter
(40%), mage (40%), priest (10%), or thief (10%). These excep-
tional individuals are of levels 1-10. They are unarmored, but
equipped with weapons according to the restrictions of their
class. Saurial spell-casters may still cast their spells in this plane,
and those who derive their abilities from gods may continue to
do so if their god has a Realmsian equivalent.

Ecology: Saurials mate for life and can produce 1-2 eggs a year.
Both male and female share the duties of keeping the eggs warm
and safe, feeding the hatchlings, and training them. A saurial ap-
pears full grown within five years, but the experience that brings
mental maturity takes as long to develop as it would in a human.
Saurials live a very long time if in favorable conditions. Grypht
is more than 200 years old, without the aid of magic. Hornheads
and bladebacks require a lot of vegetation to survive, so they are
careful to limit their numbers in small regions, while the Lost
Vale’s abundant wildlife can support many more finheads and
flyers.

Finbacks: Finbacks tend to be alert, bright, active, curious, and
emotional. They are good with their hands and have enough
muscle for common work and defense. Exceptional finbacks are
usually, though not always, fighters or fighter sub-classes. Fin-
backs tend to believe in ultimate concepts of good, evil, and
truth, and see things in terms of black and white. They are enthu-
siatic about new tasks and adventures, and leap into dangerous
situations before getting a full idea of what dangers await. Most
saurials found outside the Lost Vale are likely to be finbacks.

Hornheads: Hornheads are large and powerful, and tend toward
careful, rational planning and thought. While they are slow of
speech and carefully choose their words, they are not slow of
mind, and have an interest in the sciences and crafts such as
blacksmithing and weapon-making. Exceptional individuals may
be of any character class, but the most powerful hornhead in the
Realms is a spell-caster.

Bladebacks: Bladebacks are social creatures, more than the other
three races, and as such tend to congregate with other saurials
more readily. They are the most straight-forward and trusting of
the saurials, but understand saurial nature well enough to know
what their comrades want. Bladebacks are slow to anger, but
once riled are passionate fighters. They are slow to forgive slights
and offenses, and have long memories. Within the saurial organi-
zation, bladebacks often rise to positions of power as leaders of
the combined groups, or advisors to those leaders. Exceptional
bladebacks are often priests.

Flyers: Flyers are nervous, noisy saurials, both irritable and irri-
tating. They have the benefit of flight, and as such often flee rath-
er than fight. Enthusiastic conversationalists, flyers natter on
about whatever gossip comes to mind. Their role in the commu-
nity is usually as scouts or messengers, but there have been flyer
heroes in saurial history who have rescued their larger brethren
on many occasions, as any flyer will repeatedly tell you. Excep-
tional flyers are usually fighters or thieves.
Sha’az

zs ema]
INS

—___ oe

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Arctic glaciers
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Feudal hives
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: Nil (G)
ALIGNMENT: Lawful neutral (good)
NO. APPEARING: 2-12 (2d6)

 

ARMOR CLASS: 5 (4 with shield)

 

MOVEMENT: 6, FI 18 (B)

HIT DICE: 1

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 bite or weapon
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4 or by weapon

 

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Poison frost
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Empathy
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

 

SIZE: M (6’ tall)
MORALE: Fearless (19)
XP VALUE: Drone: 15

Warrior: 270
Queen: 1,400

These creatures are a race of insect-humanoids that have adapted
to arctic temperatures. Sha’az are enemies of the haun (q.v.)

Fluffy white down protects them from the icy weather. The
down is thickest at the four hind leg extremities, which are also
protected by dense felt-like growth. Although the sha’az torso
and head are near-human, its six legs are more insect-like. The
chest is rather broad, ending in a thin, muscular waist.

The creature’s six legs allow it easy movement on the snow. It
can hold on to sheer surfaces or slippery ice with its strong, re-
tractile hooks at the leg extremities. The two front legs end in a
series of smaller, prehensile hooks that enable the sha’az to ma-
nipulate objects or weapons. The sha’az often stands on its four
hind legs, and keeps the rest of its body erect.

The sha’az warrior is male. It conceals four fragile, translucent
wings in the white down of its back. These wings enable flight in
all but extreme weather conditions.

Underneath the white down, a sha’az body is quite skinny, and
partially covered with chitinous plates on the thorax, back, and
shoulders. The remainder of the body displays wiry muscles un-
der a thick gray skin, especially on the abdomen, neck, and legs.
Its face displays near-human features: a mouth, a hooked nose,
and deep set eyes, with a thick, white mane on the top of its head.
Two large, serrated mandibles jut out of its cheeks.

Combat: Sha’az avoid combat if isolated. They prefer fighting in
groups, especially when hunting. In the face of great danger,
sha’az usually attempt to alert the rest of the hive.

Sha’az are advanced enough to use weapons and shields. They
do not wear armor. Warriors commonly use spears, swords, nets,
or bows. These warriors are capable of using their bows in mid-
flight, with a -2 attack penalty in addition to other adjustments.

As an alternative to weapons, a sha’az warrior can bite a foe
with its venomous mandibles. The poison causes the victim to
freeze, inflicting 1-6 points of damage per round, until the victim
successfully saves vs. poison. The victim is allowed one saving
throw per round, with a cumulative -1 penalty each successive
round. At 0 hit points, the victim is frozen and dies. The sha’az
watrior can only use its venom once a day. Mandibles alone in-
flict 1-4 points of damage.

Each hive has a queen that fights like a 10 Hit Dice sha’az with
10th-level clerical spellcasting abilities. Her drone servants which

 

 

are the female Sha’az, are flightless and fight with a -2 attack
penalty. The drones’ mandibles are not poisoned. They fight only
if no other choice is available, or if the queen is in some sort of
danger. Drones are not normally armed.

For each ten sha’az warriors, one has a limited empathic ability
which allows it to communicate with his queen, when it is away
from the hive. It is a knight with maximum hit points. The ability
can be used at will within 900 feet. Within a mile, the knight has a
10% chance of failure per round of usage, which increases an-
other 1% for each extra mile of distance between the knight and
his queen. The maximum chance of failure is limited to 90%, re-
gardless of the distance. When failing an empathic roll, the
knight loses its empathic ability for the remainder of the day.

Habitat/Society: Sha’az live in hives dug into arctic glaciers. A
hive contains 30-60 sha’az (1d4+2x10). Half are hunter/
warriors, while the remainder are drones that tend the hive and
serve the queen. A queen lays eight-pound eggs that ensure the
survival of the hive. She is the only sha’az capable of casting
spells and of making magical objects. Sha’az are literate and use a
combination of words, movements, and scents to communicate.
A queen lives several centuries. Occasionally, she engenders
another queen who leaves when it is an adult so it may establish
another hive. This new hive is a loyal vassal of the mother-
queen. Social status among sha’az depends on how close to the
mother-queen one’s hive belongs. There can be many layers of
mother-daughter allegiances among sha’az hives. When a queen
dies, her drones ritually seal the entrance to her hive. Soon there-
after the mourning hive dies of asphyxiation. Its vassal hives, if
any, then become vassals of the oldest related mother-queen.

Ecology: Sha’az hunt for food and feed on polar bear, whale,
seal, deer, or haundar (q.v.). They also trade shell pieces with
other races. Their enemies are the haun that prey on their eggs.
The eggs contain a substance that alters resistance to psionic ef-
fects. Haun use it to help maintain control over their giant
mounts, the haundars.
Silver Dog

as VePeer ir ~ ora

FORGONE ALS

at

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Forest
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Water/ moonlight
INTELLIGENCE: Genius (17-18)
TREASURE: None
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: -10
MOVEMENT: 18

HIT DICE: 20

THACO: NA (ee below)
NO. OF ATTACKS: NA (ee below)
DAMAGE/ATTACK: _NA (see below)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: None
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 90%

 

SIZE: M (5’ long)
MORALE: Unsteady (5-7)
XP VALUE: 1,000 or -1,000

The few travelers who have glimpsed these beautiful canines say
that silver dogs seem more creatures of dream than truth. They
appear to be large dogs with long, flowing hair the color of mer-
cury or molten silver. Witnesses describe them as having a thin
and elegant frame, manelike mantle, regal face, and piercing
eyes.

Silver dogs have only appeared at night, when they shimmer
darkly like the finest steel in starlight. Demihuman observers
have said that silver dogs radiate no heat, and thus can only be
seen with normal vision.

Combat: Silver dogs never attack; they always flee from combat.
They are shy and elusive creatures who avoid any creatures they
smell, see, or hear. Sadly for these retiring beasts, though, intelli-
gent creatures who glimpse them often pursue them.

Because of the shadowy, metallic bodies of silver dogs, charac-
ters must make a Wisdom check to even glimpse a silver dog in
the night-time forest. Those unlucky enough to see the creature,
though, are overcome by the grace and beauty of the creature
unless they make a successful save vs. spells. If the save fails, the
character is so struck by the creature’s elegance that he feels he
must capture it. The character must pursue the silver dog for
1d10 + 4 rounds, seeking not to injure it, but to catch it alive and
unharmed. All the while, the dog flees at its full rate, heading
ever deeper into the forest. At the end of the character’s mono-
maniacal desire to capture the dog, he may or may not continue
the pursuit. Unfortunately, many such chases end with the char-
acter separated from his party and lost in deep woodlands.

In addition to silver dogs’ 90% magic resistance, only certain
enchantment and charm spells can affect them. The priest spells
command, remove fear, charm person or mammal, hold person,
quest, and confusion affect a silver dog normally. The wizard
spells friends, hypnotism, sleep, suggestion, charm monster, con-
fusion, emotion, domination, hold monster, binding, and de-
mand also affect a silver dog normally. Other spells have no
effect upon this odd beast.

~

SS

 

If a silver dog is ever captured, whether by nets or spells, one
of two things occurs. If the capturing character is any alignment
but pure neutral, or if the character is of neutral alignment and
means to harm the silver dog, the dog disintegrates, as per the
wizard spell, and the character suffers a 1,000 XP loss. If the sil-
ver dog is captured by a character of neutral alignment who
means the dog no harm, the character receives a wish and 1,000
XP. As soon as the wish is fulfilled, the silver dog disappears as
per teleport without error. If ever a silver dog is cornered and
slain, the slaying character suffers a loss of 1,000 XP.

Habitat/Society: According to some sources, silver dogs dwell in
dens located in deepest woodlands. No silver dog pups have ever
been discovered, nor any bones or droppings found about these
dens. As far as is known, silver dogs are utterly solitary.

Ecology: Unlike other canines, silver dogs have only been wit-
nessed drinking water and “consuming” moonlight. The beasts
perform the latter process by standing upon lonely cliffs with
head raised as if to howl at the moon. No sound is ever produced,
however. Some speculate that the diet of the silver dog consists
entirely of water and moonlight. Though this theory seems quite
unlikely, it does explain why silver dogs emerge from their deep
woodland homes and sometimes encounter adventurers.

Though unbiased observers hesitate to ascribe to silver dogs
any contribution to forest ecology, druids consider silver dogs to
be guardian spirits of the forest. According to druid lore, silver
dogs are key to the balance of predator and prey in the wood-
lands. When silver dogs are plentiful, meaning one spotted by a
druid every year, the forest thrives. When silver dogs are few,
meaning one spotted by a druid every decade, the forest is threat-
ened and begins to dwindle. Druids thus often pursue the dogs,
wanting to be granted a wish. Typically, successful druids wish
that a silver dog be sighted by a druid of this forest in every sea-
son of this decade.
Simpathetic

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Plains

FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary or flock
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Diurnal

DIET: Carnivore/ scavenger
INTELLIGENCE: Highly intelligent (13-14)
TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil (see below)
NO. APPEARING: 1-6 or 4-400+

ARMOR CLASS: 7

MOVEMENT: 3, FI 18 (B)

HIT DICE: Ahp

THACO: 20

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4

 

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Alignment alteration
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Immune to fire-based attacks
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 90%

 

SIZE: T (1' wingspan)
MORALE: Fanatic (17-18)
XP VALUE: 650

Originally from the Seventh Hell, this “bird” now makes its home
in a number of grassy plains throughout the Prime Material
Plane. Although everything about it indicates that it is a bird,
there are some very unusual aspects of the creature that indicate
something more sinister and alien.

Its mottled brown feathers offer excellent camouflage against
the variegated grasses of most plains. When it flies, it is distin-
guished by its distinctive black wings and tail coverts. The cov-
erts are presumed to be used for display during the courtship
dance, though it has not been confirmed. Simpathetics are shy at
all times and seemingly invisible during courtship.

The simpathetic has a dark yellow beak and legs. Reports of
the bird when it first appeared indicated a much different crea-
ture. The feathers were described as a sooty gray-black and the
beak and legs as blood-red. It seems that the simpathetic has rap-
idly evolved during the short time it has been on the Prime Mate-
rial Plane.

Combat: The simpathetic has one physical attack. It attacks with
its beak for 1-4 points of damage. It prefers to run through the
tall grasses and hide rather than to attack, but both the male and
female will attack to save their nestlings.

If an intruder comes too close to a nest of eggs or chicks, the
parents scurry off in opposite directions. Each flails about, drag-
ging one wing, chirping hideously, in an effort to draw attention
away from the nest. These efforts are always effective against
semi-intelligent or lower creatures. Of course, once a predator
has been distracted far enough away from the nest, the sim-
pathetic flies away, suddenly whole and sound again.

It is when the simpathetic performs its injured-wing routine in
the presence of humans of good alignment and demihumans that
the bird uses its attack. Humans of any good alignment who can
see the bird flap about and hear its pitiful cry are attracted by the
bird's plight. Characters of neutral alignment are immune to the
simpathetic. Characters of evil alignment are also immune to the
simpathetic, but are often on the lookout for such birds. Such
characters must successfully save vs. spells with a -5 penalty or

 

 

 

 

 

 

they must stop to help the simpathetic.

If a character successfully saves vs. spells, he or she is forever
immune to the simpathetic’s charm. At no time in the future will
he or she ever be inclined to help the “injured” bird.

Those who initially fail their saving throw stop whatever they
doing and follow the bird. They try to catch the simpathetic and
hold it on their lap for 1-4 rounds. Once the bird is caught it re-
mains quietly in their hands.

Characters must successfully save vs. spells, again at the -5
penalty, for each round that the bird is to remain on the charac-
ters’ lap. Each time the characters make an unsuccessful save vs.
spells, they feel their alignment being sapped away. Each failed
round causes the characters to move a bit closer toward evil.

For example, a lawful good paladin who has stopped to help a
bird after an unsuccessful save vs. spells, rolls a four to indicate
the number of rounds she will hold the bird. Her saving throws
are unsuccessful in the first three rounds, but she is successful in
the fourth round. She is now no longer lawful good, but instead
has become lawful neutral. However, she can take some comfort
in the fact that she will never fall for the simpathetic’s ruse in the
future. For the purpose of this alignment attack, alignment runs
in order as follows: lawful good, chaotic good, neutral good,
lawful neutral, chaotic neutral, true neutral, neutral evil, chaotic
evil, lawful evil.

If characters successfully save vs. spells during the 1-4 rounds
they are holding the bird, they suddenly realize the error and
throw the bird from their lap. The characters are also immune to
the bird's cries in future encounters. Thus, if the paladin in the
above example had made a successful saving throw on her sec-
ond round holding the bird, she would now be chaotic good as
opposed to lawful neutral.

The simpathetic is 90% resistant to magical spells and magic-
based attacks. It is immune to all fire-based attacks. Some sages
think that this immunity must be a result of the species’ origina-
tion point, the Seventh Hell. Yet other sages rationalize that the
immunity is because the simpathetic is originally from the Ele-
mental Plane of Fire.
Simpathetic

 

Very old rumors abound about the simpathetic having a third
attack. This attack is the spitting of burning blood. However, no
one in recent times has reported such an attack, and this rumor is
believed to be nothing more than an old wives’ tale.

Habitat/Society: Simpathetics typically form family groups that
consist of two adult parents and 1-4 nestlings. These family
groups are the core unit of simpathetic society. The simpathetics
seem totally devoted to the raising of their chicks. They are excel-
lent parents, readily feeding and protecting the chicks, even
against terrible odds. One renowned ornithological sage noted in
his observations a pair of simpathetics who decided to nest in a
rocky incline, despite it being home to a red dragon. They val-
iantly raised their first clutch, driving the dragon away several
times. Unfortunately, the dragon grew more skillful once the sec-
ond clutch arrived. Mother and chicks were eaten shortly after
the eggs hatched. The father flew away, chirping mournfully.

In the fall of each year, simpathetics come together in flocks as
small as a few family groups to several hundred groups. It is at
this time of year that the birds are most visible, for in flocks they
tend to become quite noisy, chirping and crying day and night.
The skies are filled with spectacular aerial displays, and only
lately have sages begun to believe that these displays are mes-
sages acted out rather than simply good spirits.

It is a fact that sages have observed the flocking together of
simpathetics in what can only be a prelude to migration, but no
one knows where they migrate to. The birds simply gather, put
on their aerial displays for a few days to a week, and then sud-
denly disappear. Sages have observed the birds during this flock-
ing pattern, only to notice a sudden quiet fall on the flock in the
deepest part of the night and to find the birds gone by morning.
The assumption is that the birds use a means of planar travel to
reach their destination. In the spring, the birds once again appear
as suddenly as they disappeared. The aerial displays and noise
recur for a few days and the birds then depart once more in their
family units.

Sages have discovered only recently that the birds are quite
intelligent. Simpathetics are capable of a contorted version of
Common, which makes them quite difficult to converse with.
But they do know and can speak fluently all avian and avianlike
languages. It is also presumed that they can converse with crea-
tures from the Planes of Hell.

There are a number of neutrally-aligned sages and wizards
who have become interested in the simpathetics from a scientific
standpoint. A few of these characters have even gone so far as to
capture certain simpathetics and selectively breed them. Unfortu-
nately, the simpathetics’ loyalty to one mate has hampered these
experiments. The experimenters have been forced to isolate from
birth a selected pair in the hope they will bond only with each
other when mature and thus become mates. These experiments
are quite long-range in scope, however.

It is the sages’ theory that the simpathetic is gradually evolving
away from the truly evil creature it was in the Planes of Hell.
They believe that, by selectively breeding the birds, they can
speed evolution along. The result would be simpathetics that
produce eggs that will teleport to planes other than the Seventh
Hell. These sages hope to either develop strains of simpathetic
eges for every plane or an ultimate strain that will teleport the
consumer to the plane of his choice. As a physical indicator of
their success, they believe that the birds plumage color will iden-
tify the progress. As such, they have been trying to breed light-
colored birds to eventually produce white simpathetics.

Ecology: Located in grassy plains, the simpathetic is found in ei-
ther family groups that consist of a male (cock) and female (hen)

plus 1-4 chicks, or flocks that consist of 4-400 or more family
groups.

The simpathetic mates for life and does not take another mate
even if one of the pair should die. It is believed that they live for
about 20 years and that they mate when about five years old.

The creature raises three clutches of 1-4 eggs a year. Both par-
ents care for the nestlings for two months, feeding the chicks
bugs, small rodents and reptiles, and bits of carrion. At the end
of two months, the nestlings are sent on their way. Usually they
gather with other nestlings to form loose flocks. The young birds
tend to remain in these flocks and wander. Pocket populations of
the simpathetic are clearly attributable to the nestlings. Once ma-
ture, the birds pair off and disperse, leaving to form new family
colonies. The actual mating selection has never been witnessed.

Simpathetics are hardy breeders and so have spread to new ter-
ritories. They have done so easily because of their secretive na-
ture and few predators. Red dragons have been known to eat
whole flocks of the bird as an appetizer, though it is uncertain
how the dragons catch the birds, as the birds are both immune to
the red dragons’ breath weapon and agile fliers. Only a few other
animals actually hunt the creatures, most notably the leucrotta,
but only where their territories interconnect.

Evil planar creatures trapped on the Prime Material Plane and
characters of evil alignment who wish to journey to the planes
hunt the simpathetic for its eggs. However, a number of evil crea-
tures have died doing so. The eggs are only edible, and thus usa-
ble for teleportation, early in their gestation. If a baby
simpathetic has begun to form within the egg, the results of swal-
lowing the partially shaped creature are most undesirable. It is
assumed that the planar energy within the egg is at an extremely
concentrated state while the bird is forming, and some sages
speculate that those creatures who swallow the contents of such
an egg implode and are transported to an entirely empty void.
Most intelligent creatures have learned to hold a light source be-
hind the egg to check its contents.

Historical Note: The simpathetic was presumably on the verge of
extinction when a mated pair was teleported into the Prime Ma-
terial Plane by a mighty wizard. She had heard of an obscure
legend that the creature’s eggs could be eaten as a means of planar
travel.

The wizard worked her spells and successfully brought the
simpathetics to her homeland, but they were vile creatures who,
according to records, hissed burning blood whenever she was
near. However, her magics were strong enough to keep the birds
captive. In due course, the female laid an egg. It was then that the
wizard became greedy. Instead of performing experiments on the
one egg, she cracked the egg and boldly swallowed it raw.

The wizard's assistant then witnessed an amazing sight. He
said that he could actually see the egg slither down her throat and
into her stomach, glowing dully beneath her robes. He then no-
ticed the wizard 's face, for she had the strangest expression he
had ever seen. He expected her to be in pain, but her expression
was one of utter amazement instead. Her body then imploded
inward and he could see through the wizard and into a strange
spatial dimension showing stars and nebulae. Then the wizard
abruptly disappeared, leaving behind only the metal items she
had worn, including her buttons, buckles, ring of protection, and
amulet of the planes. Her assistant could only assume she had
meant to use the amulet to come back from the planes.

The assistant never saw the wizard again. As a reward for free-
ing him of his apprenticeship, he let the two birds loose. The
birds subsequently secured a new home in the wastelands sur-
rounding the wizard's lair.
Skuz

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Ponds, lakes
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (16)
TREASURE: F
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1-6

ARMOR CLASS: 0
MOVEMENT: 1,5w 15
HIT DICE: 11

THACO: 9

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-12/2-12

 

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Energy drain, spells
SPECIAL DEFENSES: +2 or better weapon to hit
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 25%

 

SIZE: M (4-7’ long)
MORALE: Fearless
XP VALUE: 15,000

One of the most powerful and feared forms of undead, skuz
haunt still bodies of water and destroy all those foolish enough to
fall into their grasp.

Skuz have a strong tie to the Negative Material Plane. They
hate all life and attempt to drag any creatures within reach into
their watery grave.

A skuz appears as a slimy coating on the water, similar to the
algae growths on still ponds and lakes. A skuz is able to manipu-
late its slimy body, allowing it to take on humanoid and other
forms, and making it easier to attract prey. Unlike many of the
powerful undead, skuz operate in daylight as well as darkness.

Combat: Skuz attack by forming pseudo-arms from their slimy
mass. In addition to causing physical damage, each touch of a
skuz drains one life level from its victim. When a humanoid vic-
tim is weakened, the skuz pulls it beneath the water to drown it.
When dead, the victim becomes a skuz. Humanoids who are
killed by a skuz, but not drowned, do not become one of the un-
dead.

Skuzs can use spell-like abilities at will, twice per day. These
include gaze reflection, suggestion, watery double, animate
dead, and transmute dust to water.

Skuzs can be hit only by +2 or better weapons. They are im-
mune to all fire-based attacks and spells, and because of their
maleable body they take half damage from magical edged weap-
ons. Lower water causes 2d10 points of damage to a skuz, and
raise dead instantly kills it. While skuzs can be turned as a “spe-
cial” undead, they do not leave their pond or lake.

Skuz often lure victims to them by taking on the form of hu-
mans, usually children, and acting as if they are drowning. Skuz
prefer not to attack until their prey is in the water, where the un-
dead have the advantage.

Occasionally skuz work together to attract prey, using their
spell-like abilities in concert, or appearing as a group of drown-
ing people. In this instance each skuz attacks more viciously,
wanting to be the one who brought the most victims to their
doom.

Habitat/Society: Skuz occupy ponds, small lakes, and stagnant
bodies of water, usually in temperate and tropical climes near hu-

 

s Y we
wes RN Oy
Seo WE WIL” A

 

 

man civilizations. Skuz avoid northern locations, where long,
harsh winters freeze the water, restricting their movement. And
they are rarely found in desolate areas where few humanoids
could be found.

Although skuz are primarily solitary, one that has been suc-
cessful in drowning humanoid victims has several skuz with it in
the same body of water. However, if a pond or lake becomes too
crowded with the undead, some opt to leave, crawling to another
body of water where they have less competition when feeding.

Skuz are equally active during the day and evening. They have
no need to sleep and they require no food, although the energy
drained from victims invigorates them.

The body of water occupied by skuz is frequently devoid of all
fish and plant life, as the undead do not want even simple crea-
tures and organisms to live in their presence. Animals who come
to the water to drink are quickly dispatched by the skuz. Their
bodies are left to rot on the edge of the water and to act as a lure
for larger creatures who would feast upon the remains.

Skuz take trophies from their humanoid victims such as armor,
jewelry, coins, and other items that they pull to the bottom of
their pond or lake. Usually the most respected skuz among a
group of them is the one with the largest horde. This skuz often
directs the actions of the others.

Ecology: The skuz, like many undead, serve no useful purpose in
nature, killing without reason and destroying fish populations.
Because of its attachment to the Negative Material Plane, it is not
a normal part of the Realms.

Creatures close to nature shun bodies of water containing
skuz. However, some creatures such as swanmays and centaurs
band together to hunt the undead or to approach bands of adven-
turers, asking them to kill the skuz.

The slime of a dead skuz can be used as components in water-
based spells, usually doubling the durations of those spells be-
cause of the skuz’s magical and powerful nature.
Spider,

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical rain forest, southern cities
FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Tribal

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Frugivore

INTELLIGENCE: Average to high (8-14)
TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Neutral good

NO. APPEARING: 20-60 (In wild)

 

 

 

ARMOR CLASS: 6
MOVEMENT: 18 (climb)
HIT DICE: 1 hp
THACO: 18

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1 point
SPECIAL ATTACKS: _ Eyebite
SPECIAL DEFENSES: None

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

 

SIZE: T (1" long)
MORALE: Fanatic
XP VALUE: 1

Though an ancient species in the Forgotten Realms, monkey spi-
ders’ tiny size and harmlessness have kept them unnoticed until
now. Measuring only an inch from their simian noses to their
prehensile tails, these gangly creatures have been swatted for
years, mistaken as spiders. Eventually a southern sage who swat-
ted one counted its limbs, discovering the breed.

But for their size, monkey spiders look exactly like monkeys.
They are gaunt and fur-covered, with gangly limbs, a prehensile
tail, and have strikingly human-like faces and hands. Because of
their size, they look like spiders from any distance greater than
two feet.

Combat: Though they are fierce combatants against creatures
such as wasps and bees, monkey spiders avoid battling anything
larger than they are. If forced to battle such creatures, though, a
monkey spider tries to leap down and bite the eyes of its assail-
ant. If successful, the monkey spider does not blind the character,
but its saliva stings fiercely enough that the character must stop
all action for one round to rub his eyes. In that time, the monkey
spider makes an escape.

If a monkey spider cannot attack a character’s eyes, it bites
whatever is within reach causing 1 point of damage. The caustic
saliva in the wound raises a small welt.

Monkey spiders can jump up to five feet upward or 10 feet
down, and can climb anything a typical gray spider can climb.

Habital/Society: In the wild, monkey spiders roam the jungles in
tightly-knit family groups that number about 40. They consist of
five families of eight members each. A male prime and a female
prime, the oldest members of each gender, make decisions for the
group. The male and female primes communicate these decisions
through a complex language of sibilants, chirps, hoots, and ges-
tures. Sages who study monkey spiders believe this language to
be as sophisticated as Common.

As a family group moves through the jungle, the male prime
releases a “long call,” a cry that can reach 20 yards, to tell other
monkey spider groups that a new family has entered the area.

 

 

 

 

Male primes of opposing groups avoid each other rather than
fight. However, if forced into confrontation, male primes must
fight to the death. These contests are usually quite lack-luster,
though, because male primes are generally the oldest and feeblest
members of their packs. Such battles often end in exhaustion, at
which time the female primes bear up their counterparts and lead
their family groups off in opposite directions.

Monkey spiders build no nests, sleeping upon most any broad
leaf, and using a second leaf to provide protection from rain.

Ecalagy: As frugivores, monkey spiders spend most of their days
questing for berries, dates, bananas, and other fruits as well as
mounting occasional raids on honeycombs. Their chief natural
enemies are all insect-eating birds, rain-forest ants, who are com-
petitors for food, and rain-forest savages, who consider monkey
spiders a delicacy when roasted until crunchy.

With their discovery, monkey spiders have found their way in-
to southern cities in the Realms, becoming very handy familiars
for wizards, or animal companions for rangers and druids. In ad-
dition to their native intellect, good alignment, and loyalty to
friends, monkey spiders make good companions because of their
ability to learn Common. The only problem is that monkey spi-
ders must use their “long calls” to be heard at any distance.

The popularity of monkey spiders as companions has pro-
duced odd ramifications in some southern cities. In the regions of
Samarach, Thindol, Lapalitya, Halruaa, Dambrath, and Esta-
eund, filthy slave auctions of the tiny creatures have arisen in
back alleys and even some market places. Some monkey spiders,
once purchased, escape their masters. Rumors tell that in south-
ern regions, escaped monkey spiders have united to form an
underworld of powerful, though diminutive, despots. Purport-
edly, monkey spider spies listen in on every critical council and
court, then relay their knowledge to monkey spider kings. These
rulers in turn enlist the aid of human and demihuman sympa-
thizers to exert their influence, even in the highest courts of the
land.
Tempest

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any outside

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Special

INTELLIGENCE: Low to average

TREASURE: K

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 2

MOVEMENT: FI 24

HIT DICE: 9-12

THACO: 9-12 HD: 11
11-12 HD:9

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-16

SPECIAL ATTACKS:
SPECIAL DEFENSES:

 

Whirlwind, lightning

+2 or better weapon to hit, special
immunities and resistances
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

 

SIZE: G (50’ diameter)
MORALE: Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE:
9 Hit Dice: 6,000
10 Hit Dice: 7,000
11 Hit Dice: 8,000
12 Hit Dice: 9,000

The tempest is a living storm. It appears as a dark storm cloud of
comparatively small size. Human or bestial features can often be
seen in the roiling vapors of the tempest. Silver veins extend
across the creature and carry the electrical impulses that give the
storms life.

Tempests have no language that humans may learn. They can
communicate with air and water elementals and with genie-kind,
through subtle wind buffets, and spatterings of precipitation. A
few, perhaps 10%, have learned to speak a few words of Com-

mon. Their voices are very soft and sibilant, with a hint of malice
behind the words.

Combat: Tempests are very territorial and consider any violation
of their airspace to be a direct challenge. They feed on moisture
from animals and often hunt in and around their territories. They
have a number of innate abilities that they can use to make life
miserable for other creatures. Unless otherwise specified, all spe-
cial abilities are used as if the tempest is a 9th-level wizard. A
tempest may make two special attacks each round, one using its
wind powers and one using its electrical powers.

Once per round, a tempest can use wind wall or gust of wind,
or may attack with a strong wind buffet for 2-16 points of dam-
age. Alternately, it may create or maintain a whirlwind. Such a
whirlwind appears as a cone and may be as wide as 10 feet in
diameter at the bottom, and as wide as 30 feet in diameter at the
top. The whirlwind may be up to 50 feet high.

The tempest takes one full round to create the whirlwind. It
automatically sweeps away and kills all creatures less than 2 Hit
Dice in the area of its cone, and causes 2d6 points of damage to
all creatures that it fails to kill outright.

Tempests may also use their powers over the air to batter down
flying creatures, causing falling damage to those opponents who
fail their saving throw vs. paralyzation.

A tempest can also cast a lightning bolt once per round. Only
one victim may be targeted at a time. The lightning bolt causes
one die of damage per Hit Die of the tempest. For example, a

 

lightning bolt from a tempest with 12 Hit Dice causes 12d6 points
of damage. A victim of a lightning attack may make a saving
throw vs. spells. If it is successful, the victim takes only half dam-
age. The tempest’s lightning bolt is like the 3rd-level wizard spell
in other respects, having a length of 80 feet, setting fire to com-
bustibles, melting metals, and shattering barriers. An exception-
ally hungry or perturbed tempest sometimes uses its lightning to
destroy an entire building to reach the creatures inside.

Tempests may also use a chilling wind to affect opponents,
causing damage as a chill touch spell at the rate of 1-4 points of
damage and the loss of one point of Strength. This attack must be
made in place of either a wind or an electrical attack.

A tempest may also produce up to 20 gallons of rain per round
if it is concentrating. While the precipitation is usually evenly
distributed throughout its area, it may concentrate the fall to fill
a hole, wash out a bridge, or otherwise harm its victims.

Tempests are immune to all wind, gas, and water attacks, and
they take only half damage from electrical or cold-based attacks.
They are immune to all weapons with less than a +2 magical
enchantment.

Habitat/Society: There is much speculation about the origin of
these beings, who are related to elementals and to genie-kind.
Tempests are composed of all four basic elements which are fire,
earth, air, and water; fire in the form of lightning, their silver
“circulatory system,” winds, and rain. They may be summoned
accidentally when a spell-caster tries to call an elemental, espe-
cially one of air or water. At the DM’s option, when a summon-
ing is interfered with, the caster maybe given a 10%-50% chance
to summon a tempest. These beings may also be attracted by a
weather summoning spell, with a 1% (non-cumulative) chance of
appearing per spell.

Some sages believe that these creatures are immature jann, or
jann which have been injured in some way and cannot retain hu-
man form. Whatever their origin, they do apparently breed and
reproduce as storms. Though male and female do not truly de-
scribe the different types of tempest, there are two genders of liv-
Tempest

 

ing storm. When living storms of different genders meet, they
have a brief, tempestuous affair, causing a great conflagration
which may last more than a week. Hurricanes or tornadoes are
produced irregularly from the mass, to wreak havoc upon the
surrounding area.

When the storm finally breaks, the two tempests leave the
area, and the residue they leave behind forms 1-4 infant tem-
pests. These infant storms, sometimes referred to as tantrums,
often travel together until they reach maturity a year after their
birth. The young storms have 6 Hit Dice, and can use only the
gust of wind power, besides producing rain.

Most tempests quite naturally seem to have a very stormy dis-
position. Their hunger for animal life goes beyond their need for
the moisture contained in animal bodies. Some sages speculate
that their physical form and background, possibly some event in
their history, causes them to hate animal life. It is quite possible
that the electrical impulses that give animals their life causes pain
to the tempests.

Tempests may be related to skriaxits, the living sandstorms of
the eastern Realms (see FR10, Old Empires). No tempest has ever
been known to encounter a skriaxit, and their relationship and
possible interactions are completely unknown.

Ecology: Tempests feed on the moistures found in animal bodies.
Though unable to cause harm to living creatures by draining
their moisture, they hover close to the ground after a battle to
suck the water from dead opponents. They may also be found
scavenging after great battles between humans. By removing
water from a corpse, they render it inviable for return to life via a
raise dead spell, though resurrection and other magic will still
work.

When a tempest is killed, a silver residue rains down from their
form. If carefully gathered, this residue provides a mass of silver
equivalent to 3-18 silver pieces. Though valuable as a precious
metal, the silver may also be used as a component in making
wands of lightning or as components in weather-related spells.
Bits of the silver are also useful for making other weather or ele-
mental related magical items.

Genie-kind and elementals are enemies of tempests and they of-
ten attack one another, though some genies, especially djinn and
marids, keep tempests as pets, training them to guard or attack.

Tempests can be quite devastating to a local ecology if
annoyed, and can cause great damage with wind, rain, and other
attack forms. Living storms are never found inside buildings or
underground.

Arctic Tempest: There is a variety of tempest that is only found in
arctic and colder temperate zones. While they are similar to tem-
pests in all other respects, their special powers differ. They can-
not use the whirlwind or lightning bolt powers of the standard
living storm. Instead they may either cause snow to fall or cast
ice storm spells. The arctic tempest usually uses the hail form of
the ice storm spell, but may use the sleet form as well. If it causes
snow to fall, it may use that ability to cause 9d4 + 9 points of cold
damage to anyone beneath it. Victims may make a saving throw
vs. spells. If it is successful, the damage is reduced to half.

Like the standard tempest, the arctic variety may make only
two special attacks per round, one using a wind power, such as
gust of wind or whirlwind, and one using a cold-based power,
such as ice storm or cause snow. It may also substitute an electri-
cal attack for either of its normal attack forms, causing damage
as a shocking grasp spell for 1d8 + 9 points of damage.
Tlincalli

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical or subtropical, desert
or caves
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: City
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: High to genius (13-18)
TREASURE TYPE: Qx2 (F, Ux10)
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: 40-400
ARMOR CLASS: 3
MOVEMENT: 12
HIT DICE: 7+7 to 11+11
THACO0: 7 +7 Hit Dice: 13
8+8 to 9+9 Hit Dice: 11
10 + 10 to 11 + 11 Hit Dice: 9
NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACKS: 2-5/2-5/1-4, or by weapon and

2-5/1-4

 

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Poison, possible spell use

 

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 20%

SIZE: M (6’ tall)

MORALE: Fanatic (18)

XP VALUE: 5,000

Squad leader: 6,000 Noble: 8,000
Squad _spellcaster: 7,000 Sorcerer: 10,000
Swarm leader: 7,000 King or queen: 9,000

Swarm spellcaster: 9,000 High priest or priestess: 11,000
These horrors appear to be part human and part scorpion. They
have dark-skinned human torsos. Bony plates cover their chest
and stomach, and the ribs and backbone protrude from the body.
The origin of these horrible creatures is unknown.

The torso is supported by a bony-plated insectoid body. This
four-foot-long body is supported by six legs. The body rides two
feet above the ground. Bony plate completely covers the legs,
making them appear skeletal, but there are actually strong mus-
cles inside. The protruding spine continues along the abdomen
and extends behind it to form a tail ten feet long. The lower body,
legs, and tail are all sand-colored, and blend in rather easily in a
desert environment. Observers rarely see anything but the mus-
cular human torso until the tlincallis are close.

They have hands with two thick fingers and a long thumb.
These hands are often mistaken for scorpion-like claws. The
heads of these creatures are hairless, and their faces appear hand-
some and noble, except for the red, glowing eyes that have no
pupil.

Tlincalli communicate using an ancient variety of Undercom-
mon, and 20% also speak the local dwarven or human language.

Combat: Tlincallis patrol their territory in squads of six warriors.
A squad leader with 8 + 8 Hit Dice is also present, as is a spellcast-
er. Spellcasters have 8 + 8 Hit Dice and cast spells as a 4th-level
priest or hishnashaper. Fully 50% carry a maca and bolas, while
the others use only their natural weapons.

Tlincallis attack in an organized manner, directed by the squad
leader. They usually throw bolas and use other long-range at-
tacks before closing for melee. In close combat, they attack with
maca, claw, and tail, or with tail and two claws. The tail can
strike anywhere nearby, including in front of the creature. When
not being used for attack, the tail sweeps the area behind the tlin-
calli, checking for obstacles and assailants. Anyone struck by the
tail’s spur must make a successful saving throw vs. poison or die

 

 

 

 

 

in 2-8 (2d4) rounds. Victims suffer weakness (-2 attack penalty),
start to shake (-3 attack penalty and no dexterity bonus to AC),
then convulse (AC10 and no attacks possible), and finally lose
consciousness and die.

Patrols are more common near the tlincalli lair, and its main
entrance is guarded by three squads of warriors. In addition,
there is a swarm leader and a spellcaster, each with 9 + 9 Hit Dice.
The spellcaster has spellcasting abilities equal to those of a 7th-
level priest or hishnashaper. Those two individuals stay out of
combat. The leader directs the squads and the spellcaster casts
spells. During times of trouble, a swarm may be sent on regular
patrol.

For every two swarms, there is a noble and a sorcerer. These
individuals stay in or near the lair unless an army of tlincallis
marches, at which time they lead two swarms. Nobles and sor-
cerers have 10 + 10 Hit Dice. Sorcerers have spellcasting abilities
equal to 9th-level priests or 10th-level hishnashapers.

Finally, every lair has a king or queen, or both, with 11 + 11 Hit
Dice. A high priest, also with 11 + 11 Hit Dice, aids these rulers
with spellcasting abilities equal to a 14th-level hishnashaper or an
11th-level priest. These individuals always remain in the lair and
fight only if directly threatened.

Habitat/Society: Tlincallis live under the sands of the northern
desert in burrows connected by tunnels situated above under-
ground cities. These cities often mirror the great human cities,
with pits instead of buildings, and great hollows like inverted
pyramids. Rumor states that they are more common the farther
north one goes.

They often hold humans and dwarves as slaves, and use them
to mine and create weaponry. A tlincalli’s fingers are not very
dexterous, but the creatures are still fine sculptors with hammer
and chisel.

Tlincalli priests may serve the Maztican deities Zaltec, Plutoq,
or Nula. See the Maztica Boxed Set for more information.

Ecology: Tlincallis are dangerous predators. They eat practically
any meat, including carrion. No normal creatures prey on them.
Tren

me
nS)

~_ ae

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Damp subterranean
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Clan

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE TYPE: A, D
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil

NO. APPEARING: 10-80

ARMOR CLASS: 4

MOVEMENT: 12,Sw 9

HIT DICE: 34+3

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 or 1
DAMAGE/ATTACKS: 1-3/1-3/2-7 or by weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

 

SIZE: M (6'-7' tall)
MORALE: Elite (14)
XP VALUE: 175

Tren are a crossbreed of troglodytes with the largest, strongest,
vilest members of the lizard man race. They hate all warm-
blooded creatures, but reserve special animosity for dwarves,
who often come into conflict with them over subterranean water
supplies.

Tren weigh an average of 220 pounds. Their skin consists of
leathery scales, ranging from gray to green to brown in color.
The skin of the males is generally spiky, while the females have
smoother skin. Tren have only vestigial tails, useful while swim-
ming, but good for little else. Tren wear simple belts and loin-
cloths for clothing. Warriors carry leather shields. If they are
without a shield, they are Armor Class 5. Warriors use the most
sophisticated weapons they find. Steel short swords are a weap-
on of choice. Tren have infravision to 60 feet. They speak the
languages of both lizard men and trogs, sometimes forming a
unique hybrid language.

Combat: Tren are organized fighters, using ambushes, traps, and
other tactical maneuvers to their advantage. Most tren share the
troglodyte appreciation of steel and use whatever steel weapons
they can. Those without steel weapons, though, are still formida-
ble in close combat because of their three attacks.

Tren possess a chameleon-like ability to blend in with the back-
ground. When motionless against a stable background, tren are
90% invisible. They often attack from this concealment, losing
their invisibility but giving opponents a -4 penalty to their sav-
ing throw vs. surprise. The tren then enters the melee.

 

aah
HSS

 

 

 

 

Like their troglodyte ancestors, tren possess the ability to se-
crete an oil when excited, whose odor is most disgusting to hu-
mans, demi-humans, and humanoids. All within 10 feet of a tren
secreting this oil must successfully save vs. poison. Those who
fail lose 1d6 +1 points of Strength for 10 combat rounds.

Habitat/Society: Tren live in loose-knit clans, with each clan led
by a chief, usually the biggest, smartest tren. Several sub-chiefs
are also present, as well as a few shaman. As with most chaotic
societies, leadership is by forceful example.

For every ten tren, there is one sub-chief with 4 +4 Hit Dice.
For every twenty tren, there is one shaman (cleric) of levels 3, 4,
and 5. Each clan is ruled by a tren with 6 + 6 Hit Dice. Female tren
have 2 +2 Hit Dice, and won't fight, except to defend their home
or young. Fully 40% of each clan are females and young. Young
tren have 1 + 1 Hit Dice, but are noncombatant.

Tren value forged metal, a process they have never mastered.
Steel is the preferred alloy, but others will suffice. Tren often
mount ambushes on dwarven patrols or on travelers moving
through any mountain passes near the tren’s lair in order to gain
more metal weapons. These will most likely soon be used against
any dwarven encampments in the area.

Ecology: Tren are pure carnivores and prefer warm-blooded
prey. Dwarves and humans are among their favorites, though
they eat almost anything they can catch.
 
Seen ee I
Dey SS eo PT am eae TT rae
roe y Tut te ——F se © j
Ye eC ee ee ace itl pee

my ae _ =

 

 
es ee

 
 
Bol

a)

ia -

“ee
Nicest

~

=a

se
I

ee
i

i ayes,
Tia I ak

; Vt Kr
wt

ne
ae ec ne ce.

ee
a i

i eee Bie
eae ae - a ra !

eee: i aah <a an 7K
s ey

i pati. a Ph oo os

ee ie h dea +t ae ‘ jel a Ba Fu
fF pe ce ee aig oe el i
fae | ES
immer:
De raan Sat
oie fase a Bete Nt,
= 7, = ‘eet MS
i tear eo aes

th
ai Sab a. 4 fal a) ie ts a it,
1 - x. One: ae 2 aa ae
; : iy sa) Pe. 7 7 feo | é; a ; ii 5 4
ae ‘bea ot. Sse a if wa ase :

J fs = ay ie Hi =
Me el a a ee
ic —

ie i pipet >ME Sat oe ee ,
bel — we Swat? BS BI rr iit. > ne ; nets Pare ik ne ~
Se ae Egan ts ci Sony: ae

a >a ‘ ee ips Me Synth Se oe F les eli eur ee

Fa Pecan 1

i
gu eee
+ = a 7 7
ae Ths -_  * ra
a il a t

im

ff

 
 

eget cy Compendium

ne Re al

9615

Sea Seem tReecorte occ
ED eae eae ea
FORGOTTEN Lae ca
world!
Re cesT R aa
Ea eS
aac rare ee ea tron
Dee Uae Reged
Reema cen eee tence
| favorites) lurk within this booklet, waiting for
you to unleash them into your own campaign. As always, the
Poe ese eet ee hot OM eet ena RC Mand
ied

 
