2105

      

 

i Iw S

“Ol JRagon] —

2 Creatures of Krynn!
VY * Ready for play in a 3-ring binder! 0

 
How To Use This Book

Welcome to the fourth Monstrous Compendium volume. Here we detail
the creatures unique to Krynn, the world of the DRAGONLANCE® saga.
As in previous volumes, all entries are given in alphabetical order on re-
movable loose-leaf sheets. The loose-leaf sheets can be placed in a master
binder for easy reference as needed for an adventure.

Important Note: These monsters should not be intermingled with the
monsters from the previous three volumes of the Monstrous Compen-
dium; keep these monsters together in a separate section of your binder.

All monsters included here are typical for their type: likewise, the
encounter tables are guidelines for general play. Variations of your own
design are encouraged. Those DMs unfamiliar with the world of Krynn
and its concepts (such as the Cataclysm, the War of the Lance, and the
Wizards of High Sorcery) will find a wealth of useful information in the
DRAGONLANCE Adventures hardback and the various
DRAGONLANCE modules and books.

Each entry includes the following information:

CLIMATE/TERRAIN defines where the creature is most often found. Cli-
mates include arctic, subarctic, temperate, and tropical. Typical terrain
includes plain/scrub, forest, rough/hill, mountain, swamp, and desert.

FREQUENCY is the likelihood of encountering a creature in an area. Very
rare is a 4 % chance, rare is 11%, uncommon is 20%, and common is a
65% chance. Chances can be adjusted for special areas.

ORGANIZATION is the general social structure the monster adopts.
“Solitary” includes small family groups.

ACTIVE CYCLE is the time of day when the monster is most active. Those
most active at night may be active at any time in subterranean settings.
Active cycle is a general guide and exceptions are fairly common.

DIET shows what the creature generally eats. Carnivores eat meat, her-
bivores eat plants, and omnivores eat either. Scavengers eat mainly car-
rion.

INTELLIGENCE is the equivalent of human “IQ”. Certain monsters are
instinctively cunning: these are noted in the monster descriptions. Ratings
correspond roughly to the following Intelligence ability scores:

0 Nor-intelligent or not ratable
1 Animal intelligence

2-4 Semi-intelligent

5-7 Low intelligence

8-10 Average (human) intelligence

11-12 Very intelligent

13-14 Highly intelligent

15-16 Exceptionally intelligent
17-18 Genius

19-20 Supra-genius

21+ Godlike intelligence

TREASURE refers to the treasure tables in the Dungeon Masters Guide. If
individual treasure is indicated, each individual may carry it (or not, at
the DM’s discretion). Major treasures are usually found in the monster's
lair; these are most often designed and placed by the DM. Intelligent mon-
sters will use magical items present and try to carry off their most valuable
treasures if hard pressed. If treasure is assigned randomly, roll for each
type possible: if all rolls fail, no treasure of any type is found. Treasure
should be adjusted downward if few monsters are encountered. Large
treasures are noted by a parenthetical multiplier (x 10, etc.)-not to be
confused with treasure type X. Do not use the tables to place dungeon
treasure, as numbers encountered underground will be much smaller.

ALIGNMENT shows the general behavior of the average monster of that
type. Exceptions, though uncommon, may be encountered.

NO. APPEARING indicates an average encounter size for a wildermess
encounter. The DM should alter this to fit the circumstances as the need
arises. This should not be used for dungeon encounters.

ARMOR CLASS is the general protection worn by humans and human-
oids, protection due to physical structure or magical nature, or difficulty
in hitting due to speed, reflexes, etc. Humans and humanoids of roughly
man-size that wear armor will have an unarmored rating in parentheses.
Listed AC do not include any special bonuses noted in the description.

MOVEMENT shows the relative speed rating of the creature. Higher
speeds may be possible for short periods. Human, demihuman, and hu-
manoid movement rate is often determined by armor type (unarmored

 

rates are given in parentheses). Movements in different mediums are ab-
breviated as follows: Fl = fly, Sw = swim, Br = burrowing, Wb = web.
Flying creatures will also have a Maneuverability Class from A to E.

HIT DICE controls the number of hit points damage a creature can with-
stand before being killed. Unless otherwise stated, Hit Dice are S-sided
(I-8 hit points). The Hit Dice are rolled and the numbers shown are added
to determine the monster’s hit points. Some monsters will have a hit point
spread instead of Hit Dice, and some will have additional points added to
their Hit Dice. Thus, a creature with 4 +4 Hit Dice has 4d8 +4 hit points
(8-36 total). Note that creatures with + 3 or more hit points are considered
the next higher Hit Die for purposes of attack rolls and saving throws.

THACO is the attack roll the monster needs to hit armor class 0. This is al-
ways a function of Hit Dice, except in the case of very large, non-
aggressive herbivores (such as some dinosaurs). Humans and
demihumans always use player character THACOs, regardless of whether
they are player characters or “monsters”. THACOs do not include any
special bonuses noted in the descriptions.

NUMBER OF ATTACKS shows the basic attacks the monster can make in
a melee round, excluding special attacks. This number can be modified by
hits that sever members, spells such as haste and slow, and so forth. Mul-
tiple attacks indicate several members, raking paws, multiple heads, etc.

DAMAGE PER ATTACK shows the amount of damage a given attack will
make, expressed as a spread of hit points (dice roll combination). If the
monster uses weapons, the damage will done by the typical weapon will
be followed by the parenthetical note “weapon”. Damage bonuses due to
Strength are listed as a bonus following the damage range.

SPECIAL ATTACKS detail attack modes such as dragon breath, magic
use, etc. These are explained in the monster description.

SPECIAL DEFENSES are precisely that, and are detailed in the monster
description.

MAGIC RESISTANCE is the percentage chance that magic cast upon the
creature will fail to affect it, even if other creatures nearby are affected. If
the magic penetrates the resistance, the creature is still entitled to any nor-
mal saving throw allowed.

SIZE is abbreviated as: “T,” tiny (2’ tall or less); “S,” smaller than a typical
human (2 +’ to 4’); “M,” man-sized (4 +’ to 7’); “L,” larger than man-sized
(7+ to 12’); “H,” huge (12 +’ to 25’); and “G,” gargantuan (25 +’).

MORALE is a general rating of how likely the monster is to persevere in
the face of adversity or armed opposition. This guideline can be adjusted
for individual circumstances. Morale ratings correspond to the following
2-20 range:

2-4 Unreliable
5-7 Unsteady
8-10 Average
11-12 Steady
13-14 Elite
15-16 Champion
17-18 Fanatic
19-20 Fearless

XP VALUE is the number of experience points awarded for defeating (not
neccessarily killing) the monster. This value is a guideline that can be
modified by the DM for the degree of challenge, encounter situation, and
for overall campaign balance.

Combat is the part of the description that discusses special combat abili-
ties, arms and armor, and _ tactics.

Habitat/Society outlines the monster’s general behavior, nature, social
structure, and goals.

Ecology describes how the monster fits into the campaign world, gives
any useful products or byproducts, and presents other miscellaneous in-
formation.

Close variations of a monster (e.g. merrow, ogre) are given in a special
section after the main monster entry. These can be found by consulting the
index to find the major listing.
 

 

This index includes only monsters in this volume, which covers the creatures of the DRAGONLANCE® saga. “Name” refers to the creature in question,
“Section” refers to the entry under which that creature is found, and “Compendium” entry notes that all these creatures are found in this volume of the
Monstrous Compendium.

Monsters listed here do not have entries of their own-they are found under the entry listed in “Section.” For example, bakali is found under “Lizard
Man (of Krynn).” Monsters with their own entries (.e., whose names appear at the top of a page in the Compendium) are not listed here.

Name

Abanasinian centaur
Aghar

Amphi dragon
Ant, velvet
Aurak

Baaz

Bakali

Blood Sea imp
Blood Sea minotaur
Bozak

Crystalmir centaur
Daergar
Dargonesti
Death knight
Dimernesti
Emre

Endscape centaur
Ghagegler
Gholor
Grasshopper
Gully dwarf
Half-elf

Hill dwarf
Hylar

Ice bear

Ice Folk

irda
Jarak-sinn
Kagonesti
Kapak
Kingfisher

Section Comp. Name Section Comp.
Centaur (of Krynn) DL Knight of Solamnia Man DL
Dwarf, Gully (Aghar) DL Kodragon Dragon, Kodragon DL
Dragon, Amphi DL Locust Insect Swarm DL
Insect Swarm DL Mad gnome Gnome, Tinker DL
Draconian, Aurak DL Mountain dwarf Dwarf, Mountain (Hylar) DL
Draconian, Baaz DL Neidar Dwarf, Hill (Neidar) DL
Lizard Man (of Krynn) DL Orughi Ogre (of Krynn) DL
Imp, Blood Sea DL Othlorx Dragon, Othlorx DL
Minotaur (Krynn) DL Plainsmen Man (of Krynn) DL
Draconian, Bozak DL Prickleback Kalothagh DL
Centaur (of Krynn) DL Qualinesti Elf, High — Qualinesti DL
Dwarf, Daergar DL Rebel Man (of Krynn) DL
Elf, Sea—Dargonesti DL Revered ancient one Shadowperson DL
Knight, Death DL Saqualaminoti Yeti-kin, Saqualaminoi DL
Elf, Sea—Dimernesti DL Sea dragon Dragon, Sea DL
Avian DL Silvanesti Elf, High —Silvanesti DL
Centaur (of Krynn) DL Sivak Draconian, Sivak DL
Slig DL Skyfisher Avian DL
Beast, Undead DL Theiwar Dwarf, Theiwar DL
Insect Swarm DL Thoradorian minotaur Minotaur (of Krynn) DL
Dwarf, Gully DL Tinker gnome Gnome, Tinker DL
Elf, Half (of Krynn) DL Traag Draconian (proto), Traag DL
Dwarf, Hill DL Trap door spider Spider (of Krynn) DL
Dwarf, Mountain (Hylar) DL Walrus man Thanoi DL
Bear, Ice DL Warrior skeleton Skeleton, warrior DL
Man (of Krynn) DL Wendle centaur Centaur (of Krynn) DL
Ogre, High DL Whisper spider Spider (of Krynn) DL
Lizard Man (of Krynn) DL White stag Stag DL
Elf, Wild — Kagonesti DL Wild elf Elf, Wild (Kagonesti) DL
Draconian, Kapak DL Wild stag Stag DL
Avian DL Zahkar Dwarf, Zahkar DL

 

Printed in the US.A.
0-88038-822-6
2105XXX1501

Design Concept: David “Zeb” Cook, Steve “Old Man”
Winter, Jon “The Paper Monster” Pickens

Design Coordinator: Bruce A. Heard

Designers: Rick Swan, with Bill Connors, Troy Denning,
Bruce Nesmith, James M. Ward, and Steve
Winter

Editing Coordinator: Karen S. Boomgarden

Editor: Mike Breault

Typesetting: Gaye O'Keefe

Keylining: Stephanie Tabat

Artistic Coordinator: Peggy Cooper

Cover Art: Jeff Easley

Interior Art: Mark Nelson

Distributed to the book trade by Random House, Inc., and in Canada by Random House of Canada,
Ltd. Distributed to the toy and hobby trade by regional distributors. Distributed in the United Kingdom
by TSR Ltd.

©1990 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Permission granted to photocopy or
This work is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America. Any reproduction or print this product for personal use.
unauthorized use of the material or artwork presented herein is prohibited without the express written
consent of TSR, Inc.

©1990 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Printed in U.S.A.
ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AD&D, DRAGONLANCE, PRODUCTS OF YOUR IMAGINATION, and
the TSR logo are trademarks owned by TSR, Inc.


Anemone, Giant

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical, subtropical, and temperate/Salt water
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: School
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Animal (1)
TREASURE: See below
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 3-18
ARMOR CLASS: 2
MOVEMENT: 4
HIT DICE: 16
THACO: 5
NO. OF ATTACKS: See below
DAMAGE/ATTACK: See below
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil
SIZE: L (10° diameter trunk)
MORALE: Steady (11)
XP VALUE: 12,000

The anemone is a mobile, plant-like creature A voracious carnivore, it is a threat to all denizens of the sea

The anemone has a thick, cylindrical trunk that is ten feet in diameter and about eight feet tall.The trunk is usually bright purple, but can also be blue red, pink, or any combination of these colors The bottom of the trunk is covered with small suckers, while the top contains a toothless mouth surrounded by ten translucent tentacles, each 10-15 feet in length.

Combat: The anemone attacks with whip-like lashes of its tentacles it makes 1d3 attacks per round, each attack consists of 1dl0 tentacle strikes. A victim struck by a tentacle suffers 1d4 points of damage and also must roll a saving throw vs. paralysis A victim succeeding on the saving roll is immune to all paralyzing and poison effects of that particular anemone. If the saving throw is unsuccessful, the victim suffers an additional 1d6 points of poison damage and becomes paralyzed for the next 3d6 rounds. During this time, the victim is unable to attack or take any other actions Should the effects of the paralysis wear off, the anemone will attack him again; if it hits the victim can again attempt a saving throw to avoid the poison and the paralysis

The anemone uses its tentacles to drag a paralyzed victim to its mouth, a process that takes one round to complete. it requires at least two tentacles to drag a victim; the anemone can use any free tentacles to continue attacks on other opponents The mouth leads directly to the anemone's trunk cavity. When a victim is inside the cavity, the mouth seals shut. Tiny valves at the base of the trunk expel all of the water within the cavitv (this takes eight rounds). When the cavity is empty, it begins to refill with acidic juices secreted from glands in the base. The cavity fills with acidic juices at the rate of one foot per turn until the entire cavity is filled. Beginning on the first round of secretion, victims trapped in the cavity suffer 1d4 points of damage (no saving throw). Digestion is completed when the victim is reduced to -12 or fewer hit points, after which resurrection is impossible.

Because of the confined space, victims trapped in the cavity can use only short, sharp weapons to hack themselves tree. Maximum normal damage is 1 point per round plus magical and Strength bonuses. Rescue must usually come from outside. If the anemone suffers a loss of 50% of its hit points, and all of the dam age is directed at its trunk the victim can be freed. Thrusting and stabbing weapons have a 20% chance of striking the victim trapped in the trunk. If a trapped character is freed, charactcrs on the outside have a chance of suffering damage from the acidic juice, assuming they are within ten feet of the anemone. The percentage chance of receiving damage is equal to 5% for each foot of juice in the anemone when the victim inside is freed. Characters affected by the juice suffer 1d4 points of damage. (For instance, if the cavity was filled with four feet of acidic juice when the victim inside was freed, all characters within ten feet of the anemone have a 20% chance of suffering 1d4 points of damage from the juice.)

Each tentacle can suffer only 5 points of damage before it is Severed, assuming that the attacker is directing his attacks to the same area in order to chop it off. An anemone regenerates at the rate of 1 point per turn, and it always repairs its tentacles first. If the anemone suffers 30 or more points of damage in a single round, it withdraws all of its tentacles inside its body for 1d10 rounds and spews acidic juices in a ten-foot radius. Those within ten feet of the anemone when it spews juice have a 90% chance of suffering 1d4 points of damage; this check must be made for each round the character is exposed to the acid. When the anemone releases its tentacles, it stops spewing (for instance, if the anemone withdraws its tentacles for six rounds, it also spews juice for six rounds),

Habitat Society: Anemones wander the ocean floor. They move slowly and with great effort, generally preferring to remain stationary for long periods by attaching to a rock or other solid surface. They usually travel in schools of three or more.

Anemones are asexual, reproducing via buds which break off and grow into new anemones. Indigestible treasure items can sometimes be found beneath their trunks.

Ecology: Anemones eat all species of marine life. Anemones relish humanoids, especially elves and small humans. Although most sea creatures give anemones wide berth, manta rays and small sucker fish are sometimes seen swimming among a school of anemones, as these creatures are immune to the effects of their tentacles.

----

Avian

Emre Kingfisher Skyfisher "Wari
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical, subtropical, and temperate

Plain Plain, forest, and hill Mountain and hill Plain
FREQUENCY: Rare Uncommon Uncommon Rare
ORGANIZATION: Flock Flock Flock Flock
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day Day Any Day
DIET: Herbivore Carnivore Carnivore Herbivore
INTELLIGENCE: Animal (1) Animal (1) Highly (13-14) Animal (1)
TREASURE: Nil QO L, M, N, and Q Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Neutral Neutral Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 2-20 4-24 1-20 6-60
ARMOR CLASS: 7 5 3 6
MOVEMENT: 18, Fl 24 (C) 1, Fl 36 (C) 3, FI 24 (C) 15
HIT DICE: 3 1 4 3
THACO: 17 19 17 17
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 1 1 or 2 2or1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4 or 2-8 1-4 3-11 or 1-6/1-6 1-2/1-4 or 3-12
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil Nil Dive/ Drop Trample
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil Nil Nil Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil Nil Nil Nil
SIZE: M (6’ tall) M (4-5 tall) S (3’-4’ tall) M (6’ tall)
MORALE: Unsteady (7) Unsteady (7) Average (9) Unsteady (7)
XP VALUE: 120 35 270 6.5

Among Krynn’s rich variety of bird life are the ostrich-like emre, the ominous kingfisher, the intelligent skyfisher, and the foraging 'wari.

Both the emre and ‘wari are ground-dwelling birds, though the emre can become airborne for up to one turn. The emre has a plump body covered with white feathers, a long neck, bulging blue eyes, and thick, clawed feet. The ‘wari is a bulkier version of the emre, with bronze, gold, or blue feathers. The kingfisher has a crested head, short legs, and a long, pointed bill; it is deep blue or bluish gray with a white chest. The skyfisher looks like a cross be- tween a giant bat and a vulture, black or gray in color, with long, dangling legs and a sharp beak.

Combat: The emre, kingfisher, and ‘wari are all relatively harmless. Each can make beak attacks, and the emre and ‘wan can strike with their clawed feet. When spooked by loud noises or the odor of blood, ’waries can stampede. Those caught in the path of stampeding ‘wari suffer 3d4 points of damage per round.

The skyfisher is the most dangerous of these birds. It can attack with either its beak or talons, but not both in the same round. It can dive for its first attack, gaining a +2 bonus to its attack roll

and doubling the damage inflicted. Each time the skyfisher hits with its claws, the victim must roll a Dexterity check to try to avoid the bird’s grip. If the victim fails the check, he is carried aloft for 1d4 rounds and then dropped. Damage from the fall is 1d6 points for each round aloft. A skyfisher drops its prey if it receives 10 points of damage. It cannot lift prey in excess of 200 pounds.

Habitat/Society: All of these birds live in flocks. They lay 2d4 eges once a year. The emre and ‘wari range over a few square miles, while the migratory kingfishers and skyfishers range over much larger areas. The intelligent skyfishers collect a variety of shiny treasure items. Kingfishers prefer gems.

Ecology: Emre and ‘wari forage for insects, grams, and small rodents. These birds are favorite prey for wolves and other meateaters (‘wari are so dumb that they allow wolves to mingle among them). Kingfishers spear fish with their beaks, while skyfishers eat rabbits and other small mammals. Primitive tribes domesticate emre as mounts. Many cultures believe skyfishers are omens of war and death.

----

Bear, Ice

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Arctic/Plain, hill, and mountain
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Pack
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1-4
ARMOR CLASS: 6
MOVEMENT: 12, Sw 3
HIT DICE: 6+2
THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-8/1-8/2-16
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Hugs for 2-12
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: L (12’ tall)
MORALE: Average (10)
XP VALUE: 975

Resembling a cross between a polar bear and a cave bear, the ice
bear is a ferocious meat-eater inhabiting the southernmost re-
gions of Krynn. It is the most intelligent of all bears.

A mature ice bear averages 12 feet in length and weighs nearly
1,500 pounds. Its coat of dense white fur keeps it warm and
makes it difficult to see against a background of ice and snow. It
has a huge head, long ears, and bright blue eyes. Thick pads on its
feet enable it to walk on ice without slipping. Its lean body and
powerful legs enable it to swim with relative ease.

Ice bears have no formal language, but can communicate sim-
ple ideas to each other by a system of grunts. Ice bears who have
established relationships with other races are able to understand
brief spoken phrases from them.

Combat: Irritable and aggressive, the ice bear is a fearsome op-
ponent. The ice bear has excellent vision and hearing. Its sense of
smell is so acute that it can sniff out prey up to 100 yards away.
Because of its sharp senses, an ice bear gains a +5 bonus to its sur-
prise roll when encountering victims

When attacking, the ice bear rears on its hind legs and lunges at
its victim, striking with its forepaws and jaws. If the ice bear
scores a paw hit with an 18 or better, it also hugs for an additional
2d6 points of damage. It continues to fight for 1d4 rounds after
reaching 0 to -8 hit points. When reduced to -9 or fewer hit points,
it dies immediately.

The ice bear is immune to all harmful effects of cold tempera-
tures. It is similarly immune to cone of cold and all other cold-
based _ spells.

Habitat/Society: Caves in icebergs serve as lairs for ice bears.
Most ice bears live near arctic coastlines, but some live on small
islands hundreds of miles from the mainland. Ice bears spend
most of their waking hours swimming and fishing; their preferred
hunting area is the edge of an ice floe where they can scoop pass-
ing fish out of the water. Ice bears seldom stray more than a few
miles from their lairs.

Every winter, a female ice bear retires to her cave and gives
birth to one or two cubs. Though not as dangerous as their par-
ents, ice bear cubs older than six months are also formidable op-
ponents (AC 7, HD 4, THACO 17, Dmg 1d4/1d4/1d8, hugs for

 

 

 

 

 

 

1d6 points of damage). The cubs remain with their parents until
they reach maturity (about seven years), then leave to establish
lairs of their own.

The ice bear has an uncanny ability to track prey over snow
and ice. If no new snow has fallen, an ice bear has a 100% chance
of following a trail that is one day old or less. For each day (after
the first) since the trail was made, this chance is reduced by 10%.
The chance is reduced by an additional 10% for each inch of snow
that has fallen on the trail. (For instance, if the trail is two days
old and is covered by an inch of new snow, an ice bear’s chance of
following the trail is 80% .) A tracking roll is made once per day;
if the roll is successful, the ice bear can follow the trail for the en-
tire day. Otherwise, the trail is lost forever.

Ice bears have been known to establish cooperative relation-
ships with members of other races, including minotaurs and hu-
mans. Most commonly, ice bears establish relationships with the
thanoi (also known as walrus men). The ice bears track prey for
the thanoi, who then slay the quarry and share the meat with the
bears. When threatened, ice bears and thanoi unite to defend
themselves against common enemies. To facilitate movement
over ice and snow, the thanoi have designed special sleds that can
be pulled by ice bear teams.

Though often associated with evil races, ice bears are not inher-
ently evil themselves. Their memories are long, and they remain
friendly to those who have helped them in the past, regardless of
race or alignment. Characters who feed starving ice bears, free
them from traps, or heal their wounds can find themselves be-
friended by those bears years or even decades later. Ice bears can
help friends by serving as guides through hostile arctic terrain or
by joining them as allies to fight off hostile creatures.

Ecology: The ice bear mainly eats fish and seals, but any type of
prey that stumbles into its path is likely to be eaten as well. Ice
bear pelts can be made into warm coats, gloves, and mufflers.
Some races, especially evil- and neutral-aligned humans, value
ice bear claws as jewelry; a finely crafted ice bear claw necklace
can fetch as much as ten stl.
Beast, Undead

 

 

 

Stahnk Gholor
CLIMATE/
TERRAIN: Any Any
FREQUENCY: Very rare Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any
DIET: Nil Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Non- (0) Non- (0)
TREASURE: G G, H
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1 1
ARMOR CLASS: 6 6
MOVEMENT: 9,Sw9 Nil
HIT DICE: 12+12 12+12
THACO: 7 7
NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 3 or 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 3-9/3-9/3-24 3-9/3-9/3-24 or 3-

18

SPECIAL ATTACKS: _ Ensnare and fling Acidic bite
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 20% 20%
SIZE: H (20’ long) H (20’ long)
MORALE: Elite (14) Elite (14)
XP VALUE: 8,000 8,000

The undead beast is a mindless killer of unknown origin, compel-
led to destroy the living. The most common variety of undead
beast is called the stahnk.

The size of a small dragon, the stahnk’s bones protrude from
rotting flesh. It has a great horned head, and its ribs are bare and
barbed, forming a nasty cage. It walks on all fours, but it can rear
on its hind legs, balancing with its stubby tail, to bring its power-

ful forearms to bear.

Combat: The stahnk assaults anything that moves, attacking
with its razor-sharp claws and horned head. Any victim struck by
a claw must roll a successful saving throw vs. death magic or be
flung for 1d20 additional points of damage. The beast can also
charge its victims in an attempt to trample them (roll its normal
attack roll). A trampled victim must roll a saving throw vs. death
magic, suffering 1d8 points of damage if the roll succeeds and 3d8
points of damage if the roll fails. Additionally, a trampled victim
who fails his saving throw vs. death magic must then roll a saving
throw vs. wand. If he fails this saving throw, he is ensnared in the
beast’s rib cage and suffers 1d4 points of damage from the barbs
each round the beast moves. An ensnared character can break
free from the rib cage if the beast loses 50% of its hit points (a
stahnk that has already lost half of its hit points cannot ensnare
victims). Victims ensnared in the rib cage can continue to attack
the beast, but they do so with a -3 penalty to both attack and
damage rolls.

The stahnk can be turned by a priest as a special monster. It is un-
affected by flame and suffers only minimum damage (1 point plus
any applicable bonuses) from edged or pointed weapons. Blunt
weapons, such as clubs and maces, affect the beast normally.

Habit/Society: The stahnk dwells in the most desolate regions
world. It is almost always found alone, having long ago de-
stroyed all other creatures in its immediate environment. Each
stahnk claims an area of no more than a few acres as its domain.
A stahnk never leaves its domain, and it kills all living creatures
that trespass. Since stahnks destroy the bodies of their victims but
leave the possessions untouched, they tend to accumulate size-
able treasure caches.

 

 

 

 

 

Ecology: Stahnks do not eat their victims, but instead crush and

rend them into pulp. Powerful evil wizards occasionally use
stahnks as guards.

Gholor

The gholor, also known as the feaster, is an undead beast with no
hind legs or rib cage. It cannot make ensnaring, trampling, or
flinging attacks. Instead, it attacks with two 20-foot-long bony
hooked arms and its sharp teeth; its jaws secrete acid, causing an
additional 1d8 points of acid damage with each successful bite.

Gholors live at the bottom of deep funnel-like depressions lo-
cated in deserts, on ocean floors, or in similarly desolate areas.
They cannot move from their funnels. Gholors radiate a magical
pull within a 1d10-mile radius of their funnels, causing all victims
in the area to feel a desire to travel to the funnel. For every hour a
being is within this radius, it must roll a successful saving throw
vs. spell or continue to move toward the funnel at its normal
movement rate. When a victim reaches the funnel, it begins to slip
inside; it slips to the center and into the arms of the waiting gholor
in three rounds.

Anhkolox

About 10% of all undead beasts, including gholors, have en-
chanted bones that glow green. Such undead beasts are called
anhkolox. These beasts are very hot: a character touching a glow-
ing bone with his bare hands suffers 1 point of damage. If the
beast is touched with any inflammable object, such as a wooden
staff, the object bursts into flames.

An anhkolox can also attack with a breath weapon, an ice-cold
cone of green fire seven feet long with a base diameter of 2% feet,
A victim struck by the green fire must roll a saving throw vs.
spell. If he succeeds, he suffers 1d4 points of damage. If he tails,
he suffers 2d4 points of damage and his bones throb inside his
body for the next 1d6 turns; his AC is increased by +1 and all at-
tack rolls suffer a -1 penalty during that period. These effects can
be negated by dispel magic or a similar spell, though the PC still
suffers the damage.
Centaur (of Krynn)

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate/Forest, hill, and
plain

FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Herd

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Herbivore

INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)

TREASURE: M, Q; (D, I, T)

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic or neutral good

NO. APPEARING: 5-30

ARMOR CLASS: 5

MOVEMENT: 18

HIT DICE: 4

THACo: W

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2orl

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6 (front hooves) and weapon,
or 1-6 (hind hooves)

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (4-7! tall)

MORALE: Steady (12)

XP VALUE: 120

The centaurs of Krynn are half-human and half-horse, living in
secluded forests and pasture lands throughout the world.

The chest, arms, and head of the centaur are human. The body,
legs, and tail are those of a horse. The centaur is typically seven
feet tall from his hooves to the top of his head, but some rare spe-
cies, such as the Wendle centaur, are as small as four feet. An
adult centaur can weigh as much as 1,500 pounds.

The human features of centaurs are slightly larger than those of
an actual human. Their chests are broad and barrel-shaped, and
their arms ripple with solid muscle. They have huge shoulders
and thick necks. They wear their hair in long, flowing curls; hair
colors include black, brown, blonde, red-orange, and white.
They have bright eyes, usually blue or brown, but sometimes vio-
let, green, or black. Skin tones on the human half of a centaur
range from pale pink to light brown to rich ebony.

From a human perspective, both male and female centaurs are
strikingly attractive. The males are ruggedly handsome, with
square jaws, aquiline noses, and full beards. Females are sleek
and voluptuous, with full lips, soft cheeks, and sparkling eyes.
Centaurs move with an easy grace, their steps assured and proud.

The horse portion of the centaur’s body is covered with hair.
This coat of hair grows throughout the year, becoming shaggy in
the colder months, and shorter in the spring when the coat is
shed, Centaur coats come in a variety of colors, including brown,
blonde, black, white, and gray. Some coats are combinations of
colors; white and black or brown and blonde are the most com-
mon. A shiny coat indicates a healthy centaur.

Centaurs have long, full tails. They can twitch their tails at will,
and usually do so to sweep away insects or to fan a companion.

Centaurs do not normally wear clothing. When associating
with humans, however, female centaurs wear simple cloth
blouses in deference to human custom. Most centaurs carry
leather or cloth bags slung over their shoulders with long straps to
hold food, treasure, and other possessions.

Centaurs speak their own language as well as common lan-
guage. They speak in deep, sonorous voices. Humans find cen-
taur speech somewhat formal and stilted; for instance, centaurs
use “thou” and “thy” where humans use “you” and “your.”

Compared to humans and demihumans, centaurs are not par-
ticularly intelligent. Nor are they especially virtuous, devoted

 

 

 

 

 

 

more to their own self-interests than the common good. Centaurs
are sensualists first and foremost, preferring the taste of a good
wine or the warmth of a sunny day to debating philosophy or ex-
ploring new places. Soaking in a woodland stream can easily oc-
cupy an entire day.

There are four general species of Krynn centaurs. Though all share
the characteristics described earlier, as well as the social organization
and combat techniques described following, each has a distinctive
temperament and several distinguishing features. Each species is
named for the region of its origin. The various species are by no
means confined to these regions; each has been found in temperate
woodlands and meadows in all corners of Krynn.

When acentaur encounter occurs, roll 1d20 and consult the fol-
lowing table for the type; mixed groups are never encountered.
(The DM can modify the roll for specific regions as he sees fit; for
instance, Crystalmirs are more likely to be encountered in south-
ern regions, less likely in northern regions.)

Centaur Species Encounter Table

D20 Roll Species Encountered
1-13 Abanasinian

14-15 Crystalmir

16-19 Endscape

20 Wendle

Abanasinian Centaur

The Abanasinians comprise the vast majority of Krynn centaurs;
in fact, few races have seen any centaurs other than Abanasi-
nians. These centaurs developed on the plains of Abanasinia in
southern Ansalon, migrated south to the forests of Qualinesti,
then quickly spread north throughout the rest of the continent.
‘Today, there are few major forests without a herd or two of these
centaurs.

The Abanasinians are the biggest and most handsome of the
centaurs. All adults exceed 1,000 pounds and are at least six feet
tall. They are usually a single color, such as chestnut brown,
blonde, or black. Their broad backs and powerful legs enable
them to gallop for long distances without tiring and also enable
Centaur (of Krynn)

them to carry heavy weights; a large Abanasinian could carry
three human soldiers on his back with no noticeable strain. They
are extremely robust, gaining a +2 bonus to all saving throws.

Abanasinians are superb hunters and fighters. They are playful
and spirited, but they can also be quite temperamental, refusing
to cooperate with their allies for a variety of minor reasons.
Abanasinians remain loyal to their friends for their entire lives
and hold grudges against their enemies just as long.

Crystalmir Centaur

This variety of centaur was named for the Crystalmir Lake, lo-
cated near the town of Solace in Abanasinia. Originally a sub-
species of the Abanasinian centaurs, the Crystalmirs did not
migrate as far as their more adventurous cousins, and today are
largely confined to Ansalon’s southern forests and plains.

The Crystalmirs are strong and sturdy, though less so than the
Abanasinians. They rarely exceed 1,000 pounds in weight or six
feet in height. They have lean bodies, slim necks, and high-set
tails. They are usually blonde or light brown in color, with black
or chestnut highlights; a few herds are solid black or white. They
are extremely quick, able to gallop at a movement rate of 30 for
short bursts.

The Crystalmirs are shy and reclusive, the most reluctant com-
batants of all the centaurs. Their usual reaction to strangers is to
run away as fast as they can. They seldom cooperate with hu-
mans or other intelligent races, refusing even to speak with them
until they are completely convinced the outsiders mean them no
harm.

Endscape Centaur

The Endscapes are the most savage of the centaurs. Originally
from the forests of the Endscape Peninsula north of Kern, this
species is now largely confined to the northern regions of Ansa-
lon. But since they have no permanent settlements, Endscape
herds can be found just about anywhere.

Endscapes average five to six feet tall, though their leaders are a
full foot taller. Endscapes have shaggy coats and tails. The hair on
their heads often grows to their waists. They are black or gray in
color, occasionally brown or blonde. By human standards, Ends-
capes are the least attractive of the centaurs. The males have
short, scraggly beards and pock-marked faces; the females have
beady eyes and flabby bellies.

What the Endscapes lack in physical beauty, they make up for
in combat prowess; Endscapes get a +1 damage bonus when us-
ing melee weapons and a +2 damage bonus when kicking with
their powerful hind legs.

Endscapes are lawless creatures that attack for the sheer thrill
of it, mercilessly preying on the weak and helpless. They are fond
of strong wine and are frequently inebriated. Endscapes enjoy
making drunken raids on human villages, burning buildings,
stealing food and weapons, and generally terrorizing the popu-
lace. Male Endscapes are fascinated by human women, and have
been known to kidnap them.

Wendle Centaur

The Wendle centaurs arose in the Wendle Woods of Goodlund in
eastern Ansalon. Incessant annoyance from nearby kender com-
munities eventually drove most of the Wendles from the area, and
they now populate the various forests and plains in the eastern re-
gions of the continent.

The Wendles average four to five feet in height. They resemble
smaller versions of the Abanasinians and are sometimes mistaken
for Abanasinian young. However, the Wendles are distinguished
by their golden eyes and stubby tails. Instead of rib cages, Wen-
dies have plates of solid bone, giving them an AC of 4.

 

The Wendles are the smartest of all centaurs; all have a +1
modifier to their base Intelligence (meaning their Intelligence
scores average 9-11). They are more interested in philosophy, his-
tory, and other intellectual pursuits than other centaurs, and they
are always better sources of information. However, Wendles can
be argumentative and stubborn. They are wary of strangers and
seldom cooperate with them.

Combat: Except for the Endscapes, Krynn centaurs have no
love of fighting, but life in the wilderness requires all centaurs to
keep their combat skills sharp. Centaurs typically patrol in
groups of 1d4 +2. When an enemy is engaged, half of the patrol
remains in the rear to conduct missile attacks while the rest
charges ahead; if the number of enemies substantially exceeds the
number of centaurs, the entire patrol charges.

Centaurs move constantly, attempting to attack their oppo-
nents from all sides. In melee, centaurs can strike twice per
round—once with their weapons and once with their front
hooves. They can attack enemies in back of them with their hind
hooves.

Centaurs are master archers; when using bows of any kind,
they gain a +1 bonus to their attack rolls. They also favor spears,
clubs, javelins, long swords, short swords, and daggers.

Abanasinian and Endscape centaurs wield huge scythes, whose
razor-sharp blades inflict 2d4 points of damage. Most centaurs
carry at least two different weapons.

Centaurs never wear armor, but centaur leaders carry shields,
giving them an effective AC of 4. Wendle leaders who carry
shields have an effective AC of 3.

Habitat/Society: Centaurs live in pastures and pleasant wood-
lands far from human and demihuman civilizations. They have
no formal lairs, thus it is easy for them to relocate; when outsiders
move in or when food becomes scarce, they simply migrate to a
more suitable location.

An average herd has 2d4 males. There are twice as many fe-
males as males, and a number of young equal to the total number
of adults. Female centaurs are called mares, males are called stal-
lions, young centaurs from age one to four are called colts, and
those below the age of one are called foals. Mares have 3 HD,
colts have 1d3 HD, and foals have 2d4 hit points. Neither the
mares, the colts, nor the foals can use weapons, though the mares
can attack with their hooves.

The strongest stallions serve as the leaders, organized into a
council to make all decisions for the herd. A council must have an
odd number of stallion leaders, so votes can be taken when the
council cannot reach a consensus. Most councils have three mem-
bers, but larger herds have five.

Since centaurs are typically easy-going and docile, few herds
have a need for a strict set of laws. Most infractions, such as mi-
nor theft, are punishable by extra hunting or guard duty. Serious
crimes, such as violence against another herd member, are pun-
ishable by expulsion from the herd.

Centaurs love treasure. Each herd has a community treasure
cache, usually in a cave or beneath a pile of rocks, to which herd
members are expected to contribute. Centaurs keep their personal
treasure with them in leather bags or hide it in hollow trees.

Ecology: Centaurs avoid contact with most other races, al-
though they are on good terms with fellow woodland creatures,
especially unicorns. They will help humans and other good races
if it is in their best interests to do so. Ogres and sligs sometimes
slaughter centaurs to feed their pet wolves.

Centaurs eat all day long. They enjoy all types of ‘grasses,
grains, fruits, nuts, and saplings. Centaurs rarely engage in trade,
but occasionally they exchange fruits and nuts for wine and other
alcoholic beverages.
Disir

=)

ae it '
: QON}OMCE s+

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Subterranean
FREQUENCY: Very Rare
ORGANIZATION: Tribal
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Highly (13-14)
TREASURE: (B)
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil
NO. APPEARING: 2d4
ARMOR CLASS: 3
MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 5

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2d4/2d4/2d6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Pain
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Fire resistance
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (6’-7" tall)
MORALE: 15

XP VALUE: 975

The disir are a race of deep-dwelling subterranean creatures of
disgusting appearance. They stand about six to seven feet tall, al-
though they are normally hunched over to a lesser height. Parts
of their bodies are covered with a natural armor, while other ar-
eas show exposed rubbery flesh. Their skin tone is a pasty green-
white. Their pores exude a thick coating of slimy gel. This is
normally polluted with dirt, debris, and bits of dead flesh that
seem to constantly slough off them. An aura of stench and decay
hangs around them.

Combat: Disir usually fight with claws and bite, but they have
been known to use weapons on rare occasions. Although their
bite is more effective, disir prefer to fight with their claws when-
ever possible, saving their bite attack for helpless or nearly help-
less victims. The claws are long and powerful and the disir are
able to easily crush soft stones with one hand. Their bite is partic-
ularly vicious, both for their protruding jagged tangs and _ their
long, razor-sharp, rasp-like tongue. This is used to shear flesh
from bone.

All the attacks of the disir (claws and bite) are poisonous, due
to the slimy jelly that drips from their bodies. This jelly causes in-
tense pain to (but does not kill) its victims. Those struck by a disir
must roll a saving throw vs. poison at the end of the round. Only
one saving throw need be made, regardless of the number of times
the character has been hit. Each claw causes a -1 penaltv to the
saving throw, while a bite gives a -2 penalty. These modifiers are
cumulative, so if a character is struck by all three attacks, he
would have a total penalty of -4 to his saving throw.

If the saving throw is failed, the poison generates a burning
fire, starting from the point of the wound. This pain is so intense
that it numbs the muscles and gradually paralyzes the victim. The
process takes 1d4 +1 rounds. Each round until the character is
paralyzed, he suffers a -1 (cumulative) penalty to his THACO.
This penalty is removed when the pain is neutralized. The poison
has a duration of Id4 turns. The poisonous gel has a very short
life when exposed to air. It is effective on the disir because their
bodies are constantly renewing it. However, it cannot be bottled
or kept and used by others.

 

 

 

The gel also provides protection from fire-based attacks Disir
gain a +4 saving throw bonus and suffer 1 point less per die of
damage from fire-based attack?

Habitat/Society: The disir are a secretive group, due in part to ge-
ographic location (miles beneath the earth) and a fanatical hatred
of anything that might be their neighbor. Their homeland is deep
under the earth in the realm of the Underdark. There, they fash-
ion underground tunnels or, more often appropriate the homes
of others. Thus they are a scourge to dwarves and other tunneling
races Wars between the two are often fought over the homes the
dwarves have built.

The disir live in large tribal units of 50 or more members The
tribes, in turn maintain close relations with each other and sev-
eral tribes may be located in a limited area Warfare between dif-
ferent tribes is unknown. They are not so scrupulous about other
neighbors, viewing any other settlement as a source of food. Al-
though highly intelligent, they do not enter into treaties or truces
of any kind.

The disir reproduce from eggs. There are no distinguishing
signs of their sex, making it impossible to tell male from female by
sight Indeed, a single disir may be either male or female, depend-
ing on what stage of life it is in. The females of their kind (or those
in the female phase) dominate the males.

The tribes live communally sharing the duties between all the
adult members. The eggs are laid in Incubator halls and are
guarded at all times. Food gathering and raiding is done in groups
and the spoils of each are brought back to the tribe and divided
among all the members. Those who cannot assist in these tasks,
for whatever reason are killed.

Ecology: The disir, while omnivorous, greatly favor meat—of
any kind They seem untroubled by spoilage decay or source.
They eat anything they can kill or any dead they find They resort
to vegetable matter (mostly fungus only, when other resources
have dried up. Thus they often serve to scour old over-
populated sections of the Underdark, leaving behind sterile dead
remains.
Draconian (proto-), Traag

— Dagon CG

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate plain or forest

FREQUENCY: Very Rare

ORGANIZATION: Tribal

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Carnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)

TREASURE: None

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil

NO. APPEARING: 2d6

ARMOR CLASS: 4

MOVEMENT: 6

HIT DICE: 3

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2ori1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d6/1d6 or by weapon

SPECIAL ATTACKS: None

SPECIAL DEFENSES: None

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (5’-6’ tall)

MORALE: Special

XP VALUE: 120
Chieftain 175

The traag draconians are among the first failed attempts to create
draconians, a precursor of the more successful baaz. While not
overly tall, they are emaciated and gangly. They have sharp tal-
oned hands, and crocodile-like snouts. Their bodies are covered
with rough scales of a metallic brass color, a link to their heritage.

Combat: Traag draconians are fierce fighters, adept with either
weapons or their natural talons. At the same time, they are not
naturally courageous, being extremely conscious, even paranoid,
of their- own weaknesses and numbers. They do not attack unless
the odds are in their favor, either through numbers, the element
of surprise or clever strategies, or if they have been forced into
battle. Thus, their initial morale is only 8.

Once the battle is joined, however, the traag become mania-
cally fearless. A blood-lust seizes them and they no longer need to
check morale for the duration of the fight. They will fight without
regard for losses and gain a +1 on all saving throws vs. spells that
cause fear (scare, fear, etc.). This effect only comes into play
when the combat is actually joined. Since the traag don’t use mis-
sile weapons, this is when hand-to-hand combat is conducted.

In combat, the traag often disdain the use of weapons and fight
with their claws, which are effective enough. They use weapons
when there is some advantage to be gained from using the
weapon-attack mode, reach, or other special use.

Upon death, the traag bubble and rot away in a single round,
leaving only a slimy puddle behind.

Habitat/Society: The traag were one of the first products of the
lords’ attempts to pervert the eggs of the good dragons to cre-
ate araconians. (At least, they were one of the first experiments to
survive.) For a time, since they lived and were good fighters
(when they fought), the lords considered them a success and bred
large numbers of them.

Over time, however, the traag began to develop a number of
undesirable traits that ultimately made them unsuitable for use in
the dragon armies. Most obvious of these is their noteworthy

 

 

 

cowardice. Even this alone would not have been sufficient, but
coupled with a very low birth rate (each brass dragon egg yielded
only a few viable traag) and a tendency to suddenly go berserk,
attacking anything or anyone, made the traag a failure. Not
wanting to waste time slaughtering them by the thousands, the
evil lords simply disposed of their error in the lands of Aurim.

The traag have formed themselves into small tribal bands. Each
tribe is led by a chieftain (5 HD, THACO 15, Dmg 1d8/1d8).
These bands of 1d100 + 50 traag live mostly in the deserted vil-
lages and cities of ancient Aurim The more numerous and pow-
erful hobgoblins have made the plains unsafe for their habitation,
so the traag have for tified and trapped the ruins as a protection
against their powerful neighbors. The old streets are honey-
combed with hidden sally ports, rockfalls, dead ends, and con-
cealed ways.

The villages are normally organized in a similar manner. At the
center of the rums is the tribal headquarters. There are always at
least two paths to this and sometimes more. Fanning out from the
center are different encampments, or “divislons” as the traag call
them. Each division has 1d20 + 10 members. These divisions
have varying responsibilities, usually assigned the duty of guard-
ing a specific post or hunting in a given territory.

Because the traag are created, they have only one sex (male for
lack of a better name). There are no young or dependents. All
members of the tribe are warriors—they are more completely mo-
bilized than any other group in Taladas. This has led them to In-
creasing dominance in Aurim.

Ecology: Although carnivorous, the traag are often reduced to
scavenging. Unwilling to hunt for great lengths of time on the
plains, they are almost universally under-nourished. It’s not sur-
prising then that they will eat virtually anything (even hobgoblin)
that is put in front of them.

 
Draconians

—/PRAGON hice :
is = io 5 ‘a,

 

 

Draconians, also known as dragnmen, are vile monstrosities re

sembling a cross between a humanoid and a dragon. These crea-
tures were created from the corrupted eggs of good dragons.
Originally serving as special troops of the Dragon Highlords dur-
ing the War of the Lance, the surviving draconians are among the
most dangerous and repugnant in habitants of Krynn.

Background: In the year 2645 in the Age of Light, anti-dragon

sentiment ran high in Krynn, thanks in large part to acts of terror-
ism by the evil dragons. A great Solamnic Knight named Huma
successfully drove the evil dragons to a negative plane, where
they were ordered to sleep for the rest of eternity. To preserve the
balance between good and evil, the good dragons agreed to de-
part as well. Takhisis, the Queen of Darkness, managed to secure
an oath from the good dragons that they would remain in hiber-
nation on the Isle of Dragons, far from the mainland of Ansalon.
To ensure the oath, Takhisis held the eggs of the good dragons
hostage in the dark tunnels beneath the city of Sanction.

Unknown to the good dragons, then eggs were not sheltered
and protected as promised, Instead, Takhisis betrayed the oath by
corrupting the eggs to create the evil draconians. The corruption
involved foul magic performed by the evil triad of Wyrllish the
cleric, Dracart the mage, and the ancient red dragon Harkiel, the
Bender. Through arcane spells, they caused the eggs to grow and
their occupants to multiply. Wyrllish opened a gate to the Abyss,
and souls of the Dark Queen’s minions, the abishai, rushed forth
to inhabit the draconian spawn.

The draconians became an important part of the Dark Queen’s
forces when she attempted to conquer Krynn in the War of the
Lance. They were ideal soldiers, more predictable than humans
and more apt to follow orders than the ogres and goblins that
made up the bulk of the army. Ultimately, the Dark Queen’s plans
were thwarted when the good dragons learned of her betrayal.
Once the good dragons joined forces with the good races of the
world, the evil armies were defeated and Takhisis was driven
from Krynn.

Without Takhisis to guide them, the surviving draconians fell
into disarray. The weaker leaders in the Dragonarmies found that
the draconians no longer responded to their orders, while many
of the more dictatorial leaders found the dragonmen rebelling
against their control. Draconians without positions of responsi-
bility in the armies lost interest in their posts. Though some dra-
conians remained loyal to their leaders, most abandoned the
armies to fend for themselves.

Today, most draconians exist as small bands of marauders, liv-
ing in desolate wilderness areas where they practice banditry, ex-
tortion, and murder. Draconian bands living near cities or
villages often turn on the populace in frenzies of pillage, arson,
and slaughter. Though they remin loyal to Takhisis, the dracon-
ians show only occasional interest in the schemes of the their
former Dragonarmy masters. While draconain units are some-
times found in evil human armies, they remain aloof from other
races. Draconians are drawn to evil dragons, but have no particu-
lar affinity for any other creature.

Draconian Races: There are five distinct draconian races. the
stony Baaz, the magic-wielding Bozaks, the poison-tongued Kap-
aks, the shape-shifting Sivaks, and the ultra-powerful Auraks. A
sixth race, the Traag or proto-draconian, are included here; but
most scholars do not consider them to be true dracomans. Each
race arose from the corrupted eggs of a particular good dragon.
Baaz and Traag from brass dragon eggs, Bozaks from bronze
eggs, Kapaks from copper eggs, Sivaks from silver eggs, and
Auraks from gold eggs.

Each draconian race served specific roles in the Dragonarmies.
Kapaks, wielding poison blades and arrows, were used as assas-
sins and archers. The magic-using Bozaks, wielding short swords,
were used as special forces to command draconian squads. Sivaks

formed the elite forces, wearing heavy armor and swinging two-
handed swords. Baaz were the foot soldiers, comprising the bulk
of the troops. They were often disguised in robes and used as
scouts. The Auraks were rare and special generals of the dracon-
ian armies, also used as special agents since they could pass unde-
tected among humans.

Various draconian races were often assigned to the same armies
during the War of the Lance. Today, however, draconians of dif-
ferent races never combine into bands. The antagonism between
Baaz and Kapak, for instance, is as strong as that between dra-
conians and humans. It is this intense rivalry and interracial ha-
tred that prevents draconians from becoming a dominant power
in their own right.

Appearance: All draconians have the same general appearance.
They have humanoid bodies with the tails and heads of dragons.
Small scales cover them from head to toe: the scales are a duller
shade of those of their original parents for instance, Bozak scales
are a dull bronze). They have elongated snouts, razor-like tangs,
and beady eyes.

Draconians have thick, stocky bodies and range in height from
5% feet (Baaz) to nine feet (Sivaks). Sharp claws extend from
their toes and fingers. They can manipulate tools and weapons as
easily as humans can. They drag their bulky tails behind them;
the tails are useless as weapons but help the draconians balance
themselves. They have huge feet, with three splayed toes in the
front and a single toe in the back.

All but the Auraks have a pair of leathery wings growing from
their backs. Bony projections line the bottom edge of each wing,
and a single projection extends from the top. A draconian’s wings
are nearly as large as its body.

All draconians are reasonably intelligent and are adept at sev-
eral languages. In addition to their own tongue, which sounds
like a combination of hisses and wheezes, most can speak com-
mon as well as the languages of evil dragons and other evil races.

General Abilities: Though all but the Auraks have wings, only
the Sivaks can sustain flight (Bozaks can fly for a single round).
Draconians can flap their wings while running on all fours, which
enables them to move quite fast. They can also use their wings to
glide a distance equal to four times the height from which they
launch themselves (for instance, a draconian launching itself
from a 100-foot cliff can glide 400 feet).

Draconians are not affected by a dragon’s fear. ability. Actually.
draconians enjoy the company of evil dragons and eagerly ally
with them. When a draconian is serving an evil dragon, it gains a
+1 bonus to its attack rolls while within 120 feet of the dragon.

Draconians are creatures of magical origin, and thus ail of
them radiate magic. When draconians arc slain, the arcane en-
chantments that formed them create spectacular death scenes that
can be deadly to bystanders. Each race’s death scene is unique (see
the individual entries for details).

The banishment of Takhisis did not cause the draconians to
vanish or wither away. But it does mean that the only method of
creating new draconians is no longer available. Draconians are
incapable of mating (there are no meaningtul distinctions be-
tween the draconian sexes), and they are biologically incompati-
ble with other races. Therefore, the population of draconians will
inevitably decline.

Since draconians were created from the eggs of the most long-
lived of Krynn’s monsters, they are not susceptible to aging in any
noticeable way. Though there have been no recorded instances of
draconians dying from old age, it is estimated that their life spans
easily exceed 1,000 years. Thus the draconian population shrinks
only through combat and accidents.

Draconians are not vulnerable to any known disease, and they
can subsist for long periods with little food or water.
Draconian, Aurak

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN:
FREQUENCY:
ORGANIZATION:
ACTIVITY CYCLE:
DIET:
INTELLIGENCE:
TREASURE:
ALIGNMENT:

Any, except water
Rare

Solitary

Any

Special
Exceptional (15-16)
K, L, N, V

Lawful evil

 

NO. APPEARING:
ARMOR CLASS:
MOVEMENT:

HIT DICE:

THACO:

NO. OF ATTACKS:
DAMAGE/ATTACK:
SPECIAL ATTACKS:
SPECIAL DEFENSES:
MAGIC RESISTANCE:
SIZE:

MORALE:

XP VALUE:

1-2

0

15

8

13

2 or 1

3-10 (x 2) or spell
Spells and breath
+4 bonus to saves
30 %

M (7’ tall)
Champion (15)
6,000

Derived from the eggs of gold dragons, Auraks are the most pow-
erful and devious of the draconians. Soft-spoken and cold-
blooded, no act of violence is too extreme for an Aurak.

Auraks are seven-foot-tall, sinewy draconians with short tails
and golden scales. Small spines grow from the backs of their
heads They have long, sharp teeth and bulging eyes that are ei-
ther blood red, green, or black. Their bodies emit a noxious sul-
phur odor, detectable from several yards away. They wear few
clothes, aside from the occasional belt or cape. Auraks are the
only wingless draconians.

Combat: Auraks experience the agony of their victims as an al-
physical pleasure. But they are not impulsive fighters-they
strike only after careful planning has minimized all of the risks.
Auraks have several natural defenses to frustrate their oppo-
nents. They can become invisible at will until they attack. They
can polymorph into any animal their size, three times per day.
They can also change self three times per day to perfectly imitate
any human or humanoid they have ever seen; this effect lasts for
2d6 +6 rounds. The heightened senses of Auraks give them  infra-
vision to 60 feet, and the ability to detect hidden and invisible
creatures within 40 feet. Auraks can also see through all illusions.

Though Auraks cannot fly, they move as fast as other dracon-
ians on the ground. They also have the ability to cast a dimension
door spell three times per day at a range of 60 yards.

Auraks have three modes of attack. First, they can generate an
energy blast from each hand, causing 1d8 +2 points of damage at
targets up to 60 yards away. When using their change self ability,
they appear to be using a weapon appropriate to the character
they are copying, but they are actually attacking with energy
blasts. Second, they can exhale a noxious sulphur cloud five feet
in diameter three times per day. Victims caught in the cloud suffer
2d10 points of damage and are blinded for 1d4 rounds (a success-
ful saving throw means half damage and no blindness). Third,
Auraks can attack with claws and fangs (1d4/1d4/1d6), though
such attacks are seldom used.

Once per day, Auraks can cast two wizard spells of 1st to 4th
level. Preferred spells include enlarge, shocking grasp, ESP stink-

 

 

 

 

ing cloud, blink, lightning bolt, fire shield, and wall of fire.

Auraks gain a +4 bonus to all saving throws.

An Aurak’s most insidious power is that of mind control. Once
per day, it can mind control one creature of equal or fewer Hit
Dice for 2d6 rounds. This ability enables the caster to control the
actions of the victim as if it were its own body. The victim can
avoid the effects of this ability by rolling a successful saving
throw vs. spell. If an Aurak concentrates for a full turn, taking no
other actions, it can use its suggestion ability; there is no limit to
the number of times an Aurak can use this ability.

When an Aurak reaches 0 hit points, it does not die, but instead
surrounds itself with green flames and enters a fighting frenzy
(+2 bonus to attack and damage rolls). Anyone coming within
three feet of the flames suffers Id6 points of damage, unless a sav-
ing throw vs. petrification is successful. Six rounds later, or when
the Aurak reaches -20 hit points, it transforms into a spinning ball
of lightning, striking once per round as a 13-HD monster to cause
2d6 points of damage. Three rounds later, it explodes, stunning
all within ten feet for 1d4 rounds (2d4 rounds if underwater),
Those within ten feet also suffer 3d6 points of damage (no saving
throw). Items within the range of the explosion must roll success-
ful saving throws vs. crushing blow or be destroyed.

Habitat/Society: Because of their superior strength and excep-
tional abilities, Auraks are easily adaptable to all environments,
though they prefer secluded areas. Auraks live alone or in pairs;
larger groups of Auraks are never encountered. Auraks collect
treasures as souvenirs of their kills; the value of treasure has little
meaning for most Auraks.

Ecology: Auraks have an almost compulsive need to kill; most
intelligent races, including other draconians, have learned to
avoid them. There are no limits to what an Aurak will eat, though
they prefer pearls and small gems. Auraks will consume alcohol,
but they are less interested in strong drink than other draconians.
Draconian, Baaz

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any, but usually
tropical, and temperate/ Forest,
plain, and urban

FREQUENCY: Uncommon

ORGANIZATION: Band

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Special

INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)

TREASURE: M, Q; (D, I, T)

ALIGNMENT: Lawful or chaotic evil

NO. APPEARING: 2-20

ARMOR CLASS: 4

MOVEMENT: 6. Run 15 *, Glide 18

HIT DICE: 2

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2 orl

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4/1-4 or by weapon

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 20%

SIZE: M (5%’ tall)

MORALE: Elite (13)

XP VALUE: 175

* This movement rate applies when the draconian is running on
all fours, flapping its wings.

Baaz are the smallest and most plentiful draconians. Derived
from the eggs of brass dragons, they were the first draconians to
appear on Krynn.

Baaz have mottled scales in various shades of bronze and dark
green. Their eyes are blood red, and they have slightly stooped
shoulders. Their fangs are somewhat shorter than those of other
draconian races.

Baaz so enjoyed the regal dress of the Dragonarmies that many
of them continue to wear it today. Leather collars and breast-
plates studded with iron are common, as are layered metal leg-
gings. Since this apparel is poorly kept, it is primarily for
decoration, offering little in the way of protection.

Baaz are often encountered in disguise. They conceal their
wings under long dark robes and hide their features with large
hoods and masks. Such outfits enable them to pass through civi-
lized lands unnoticed.

At the bottom of the draconian social order, Baaz tend to be
chaotic in nature and self-serving when they can get away with it.
During the War of the Lance, they served as common foot soldiers
and were routinely assigned the most dangerous and least appeal-
ing duties. Their superior officers, along with members other dra-
conian races, made no effort to conceal their contempt for the
Baaz, humiliating them at every opportunity. The Baaz deeply re-
sented this treatment, a feeling that still lingers.

Combat: Baaz are cruel and sadistic fighters, especially when
drunk. They can attack twice in a round with their sharp claws;
they can also use their fangs instead of one of the claw attacks (the
bite also causes Id4 points of damage), but they prefer their
claws. Baaz use short swords, daggers, and other easily concealed
weapons; when concealment is not important, they use long
swords and spears. They fight viciously and brutally, aiming their
attacks at their opponents’ heads and eyes. Alcohol has no signifi-
cant affect on their ability to fight; if anything, it makes them all
the more vicious. If alcohol is available, Baaz always drink before
fighting. Drunken Baaz always fight to the death.

It possible, Baaz attempt to ambush their victims by dressing in

 

 

 

 

masks and heavy robes, passing themselves off as harmless hu-
manoids. When their victims are off-guard, the Baaz leader draws
his weapon and attacks, screaming for his comrades to do the
same. While fighting in their robes, Baaz are limited to a move-
ment rate of 6. After combat is initiated, a Baaz can tear off its
robe instead of attacking.

When a Baaz reaches 0 hit points, it turns into a stone statue.
The person who struck the death blow must roll a successtul Dex-
terity Check with a -3 penalty or his weapon is stuck in the statue.
The statue crumbles to dust within ld4 rounds, freeing the
weapon. The weapons and armor of the Baaz remain behind after
it turns to dust.

Habitat/Society: Bands of Baaz lair in abandoned buildings of
all kinds. Because of their talents in disguising themselves, they
sometimes live unnoticed in abandoned buildings in the center of
human settlements. Baaz have a particular affinity for deserted
inns and taverns.

Baaz live lawless, disorderly lives, utterly lacking in self-
discipline. They regularly engage in drunken raids and random
acts of vandalism. Baaz love treasure of all kinds, but they partic-
ularly covet brass dragon eggs, believing that the eggs can one
day be corrupted to create more Baaz. The magical techniques to
create new draconians are hopelessly beyond the meager abilities
of the Baaz, but they continue to accumulate the precious eggs,
just in case.

Ecology: Because the Baaz were responsible for more human
deaths during the War of the Lance than any other draconian
race, humans hunt them mercilessly. Since the end of the war, the
Baaz have won grudging acceptance from other draconians, but
relations are strained; the Baaz and the Kapaks, for instance, re-
main bitter enemies.

Baaz can eat virtually anything, including minerals, carrion,
and human flesh. They love alcohol, and even the smallest
amounts turn them into raging, boastful brutes.
Draconian, Bozak

— ae

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any, but usually tropicals, sub-,
tropical, and temperate/Forest

FREQUENCY: Uncommon

ORGANIZATION: Band

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Special

INTELLIGENCE: Highly (13-14)

TREASURE: Q x 2; (U)

ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil

NO. APPEARING: 2-20

ARMOR CLASS: 2

MOVEMENT: 6, Run 15 *, Glide 18, FI 6 (E)

HIT DICE: 4

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2 or1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4/1-4 or by weapon

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spells

SPECIAL DEFENSES: +2 bonus to saves

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 20%

SIZE: M (6’+ tall)
MORALE: Elite (13)
XP VALUE: 1,400

* This movement rate applies when the draconian is running on
all fours, flapping its wings.

Bozaks are magic-using draconians derived from the eggs of
bronze dragons. They are quick-witted, shrewd, and ruthless.
Bozaks are just over six feet tall and are covered with bronze-
colored scales. They have dull yellow eyes and gray teeth.

Though Bozaks eschew armor, since it limits their maneuver-
ability, they often wear helmets, light breastplates, and leather
arm and leg bands for body decoration.

Bozak wings are the most versatile of any draconian race.
Aside from the Kapak, the Bozak is the only draconian that can
actually fly, albeit only for a single round (because flight requires
a great effort, its movement rate in the air is 6). Not only can it
glide like other winged draconians, it can sustain the glide indefi-
nitely in a strong wind. On cold days, Bozaks spread their wings
to increase exposure to the sunlight. On warm days, they slowly
flap their wings to generate cooling breezes. When Bozaks are
anxious or lost in thought, their wings twitch and vibrate.

Bozaks are intensely spiritual, devoted to the worship of Takhi-
sis, the Queen of Darkness. They conduct elaborate ceremonies
in her honor.

Combat: Bozaks are cautious and devious fighters When possi-
ble, they strike from a distance with spells or missile weapons,
then charge for melee attacks. A favorite tactic of Bozaks is to
charge a victim on all fours, flapping their wings and hissing
while clutching swords or other weapons between their teeth. So
disconcerting is this sight that the victims are often too startled to
take action before the Bozaks are on them.

Bozaks never show mercy once they attack. However, they do
not destroy an opponent if they believe their cause can be
advanced by sparing the life.

Like Baaz, Bozaks can make two claw attacks per round, or
one claw attack and a bite attack (the bite causes 1d4 points of
damage). Favored weapons of the Bozaks are short swords, dag-
gers, or any other weapon that they can carry in their mouths
while running. Most. Bozaks carry a long bow in addition to a me-
lee weapon.

 

 

 

 

 

Bozaks are magic wielders and can cast spells as 4th-level wiz-
ards. Among their preferred spells are burning hands enlarge
magic missile, shocking grasp invisibility, stinking
cloud, and web.

Bozaks gain a +2 bonus to all saving throws

When a Bozak reaches 0 hit points, its scaly flesh shrivels and
crumbles from its bones in a cloud of dust; this process takes one
round. In the next round, the bones explode, causing 1d6 points
of damage to all within ten feet (no saving throw)

Society: Bozaks prefer to live in secluded forests where
they can conduct their religious ceremonies undisturbed. Unlike
other draconians, Bozaks construct their own lairs, usually small
huts of wood and stone with flat roots, wooden doors, and small
openings in the walls for windows. They use large rocks and tree
stumps for furniture, and line the floors with soft layers of weeds
and twigs.

A Bozak band usually contains 2d10 members, but bands
larger than six are rarely encountered. The strongest Bozak serves
as the band’s leader. In addition to making all the decisions for the
band, the leader conducts their religious ceremonies.

Most Bozak lairs have a simple shrine to Takhisis where the
band conducts regular services. A typical shrine is a crude idol in
the shape of a dragon made of stones and small trees lashed to-
gether with vines. The idol, seldom more than a few feet tall, is
centered in an open held where all of the vegetation has been
scorched black. A circle of charred bones surrounds the shrine. It
is here the Bozaks offer prayers to Takhisis and conduct their rit-
uals in her honor.

Bozaks prefer gems and jewelry to all other treasure, and often
decorate their shrines with them.

Ecology: Though utterly convinced of their superiority, Bozaks
feign friendship with other draconian races if it serves their pur-
poses (the gullible Baaz are often exploited by the Bozaks in this
way). Bozaks frequently raid human settlements for prisoners.
Their diet consists mainly of vegetable matter, carrion, and small
mammals.
Draconian, Kapak

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any, but usually tropical, sub-
tropical, and temperate/Forest
and mountain

FREQUENCY: Uncommon

ORGANIZATION: Band

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)

TREASURE: K, L, M; (1, Y)

ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil

 

NO. APPEARING: 2-20
ARMOR CLASS: 4
MOVEMENT: 6, Run 15 *, Glide 18
HIT DICE: 3
THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Poison
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 20 %
SIZE: M (6’ tall)
MORALE: Elite (13)
XP VALUE: 650

* This movement rate applies when the draconian is running on
all fours, flapping its wings.

Kapaks are a race of venomous draconians known for their
stealth. They are derived from copper dragon eggs.

Kapaks average six feet tall and have sleek torsos and long
limbs. Their scales are dull copper tinged with green, their eyes
are orange or dark brown. They have short manes of dark brown
or blonde hair hanging from either side of their mouths. Soft pads
line the bottoms of their feet, enabling them to move silently.
They speak in a soft, high-pitched whine.

The most exotic physical feature of the Kapaks are the poison
glands located under their tongues that continuously secrete a
venomous spittle. The glands are magical in nature, and are capa-
ble of producing a virtually limitless amount of the thick, yellow-
ish venom.

Kapaks avoid any style of clothing that might draw attention
to themselves.

Combat: Though their intelligence is limited, Kapaks are su-
perb fighters, fiendishly clever in their ability to catch victims off-
guard and take advantage of opponents’ weaknesses. Kapaks
rarely attack unless their opponents are at some sort of disadvan-
tage. Because of their cunning, Kapaks make excellent assassins.

Most (70%) Kapaks have the following abilities: move silently
(base chance of 15%), hide in shadows (base chance of 10%), and
find/remove traps (base chance of base chance of 20%). A few
(10%) have these abilities at a higher level. To determine the level
of the more skilled Kapaks, roll 1d6 and multiply the result by 5;
this gives the percentage increase (above the base) in each skill.
(For instance, a roll of 4 indicates a 20% increase over the listed
chances.)

Kapaks can bite for 1d4 points of damage, but they prefer to use
weapons such as short swords, daggers, slings, bows, maces, and
broad swords. Kapaks often lick their weapons before engaging in
combat to coat them with venom. Victims bitten by a Kapak or
struck by a venom-coated weapon must roll a successful saving
throw vs. poison or become paralyzed for 2d6 turns. The poison
evaporates from a weapon in three rounds; it takes a Kapak one
full round to poison a weapon again after the previous coating has
evaporated (they can do this even while engaged in melee).

 

 

 

 

 

Kapak frequently wear leather or scale mail armor. Leather ar-
mor reduces their AC to 2, while scale mail reduces it to 1. If a
shield is carried, the AC is reduced by another point. Because of
their strength, wearing armor does not significantly reduce the
Kapaks’ ability to move.

When a Kapak reaches 0 hit points, its body instantly dissolves
into a ten-foot-wide pool of acid. All within the pool suffer 1d8
points of damage per round from the acid (no saving throw). The
acid evaporates in 1d6 rounds. All items possessed by the dis-
solved Kapak, including treasure and magical items, are rendered
useless by the acid.

Habitat/Society: Kapaks are not builders. Kapak bands occupy
abandoned buildings throughout Krynn, primarily in mountain
ranges near civilized regions. Towers and castles are favorite
Kapak strongholds.

Kapaks seldom have formal leaders, making most decisions by
consensus. When disagreements cannot be resolved, a Kapak is
just as likely to leave the group as he is to fight for the acceptance
of his opinion. Kapaks have great respect for Auraks, and often
allow them to serve as their leaders.

A Kapak band has a common treasure cache; individuals sel-
dom keep more than a few coins for themselves. When a Kapak
leaves the band, he takes his share of the group’s treasure with
him, using it to buy his way into a new band.

Ecology: Kapaks are larger than Baaz and often bully and abuse
their smaller cousins. Consequently, the Baaz hate the Kapaks as
much as they do any non-dracoman race. Violent confrontations
are common between Baaz and Kapaks. Aside from the Baaz, the
Kapaks maintain good relations with other evil races, often hiring
themselves out as mercenaries and assassins. Hundreds of Kapaks
survived the War of the Lance, and they continue to serve in the
remaining Dragonarmies that exist throughout central Ansalon.

Kapaks are strictly carnivorous. Because of their extremely
high metabolisms, Kapaks must devour at least 20 pounds of
meat per day. They eat fish, wild game, and defeated opponents.
Draconian,

Sivak

hrm

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any, but usually tropical, sub-
tropical, and temperate/
Mountain and_ hill

FREQUENCY: Uncommon

ORGANIZATION: Band

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Special

INTELLIGENCE: Highly (13-14)

TREASURE: Q,% V; (Z)

ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil

 

NO. APPEARING:
ARMOR CLASS:

2-20
1

MOVEMENT: 6, Run 15 *, Glide 18, FI 24 (C)
HIT DICE: 6

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 orl

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6/1-6/2-12 or by weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: None

SPECIAL DEFENSES: +2 bonus to saves

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 20% ne
SIZE: L (9 tall)

MORALE: Elite (14)

XP VALUE: 2,000

 

* This movement rate applies when the draconian is running on
all fours, flapping its wings.

Sivaks are savage, shapechanging draconians that are derived
from the eggs of silver dragons. They are among the most power-
ful draconians, second only to Auraks.

Sivaks have gleaming sliver scales and black eyes. Topping nine
feet in height, they are the largest draconian race. They emit a
mild odor that smells ilke hot metal and smoke. Sivaks seldom
wear armor, but they sometimes wear flowing capes and decora-
tive metal bands around their arms, legs, necks, and tails.

Sivaks can run and glide like most other draconian races, but
they are unique in their ability to fly. They are extremely agile in
the air, as maneuverable as dragons and nearly as fast.

Combat: Like most draconians, Sivaks relish the suffering of
but Sivaks are particularly nasty, no victim is too small or
too weak to be victimized by a Sivaks. Sivaks work especially well
in teams defending one another against unexpected attacks and
surrounding opponents to assault them from all sides. Sivaks do
not fight carelessly. Unless ordered by a strong leader, they do not
go into battle when the odds are stacked against them, nor do
they venture into an area where an ambush is possible. They
refuse to fight to the death, flying to safety if a battle turns against
them.

The Sivaks’ movement flexibility gives them an important tac-
tical advantage. They can race forward on all fours, silently glide
from a height, or attack from the air. Many opponents are unfa-
miliar with the existence of flying draconians, glving the Sivaks
the additional advantage of surprise—for instance, a Sivak
chdrging on all fours can suddenly take to the air and swoop at its
opponent from behind.

Sivaks are also powerful shapechangers. When a Sivak slays a
humanoid of its size or smaller, it can take the form of the victim.
It does not gain the memories, experiences, or spell use of its vic-
tim and, like all draconians, it contniues to radiate magic, but its
appearance and voice are exact matches to those of the victim. A
Sivak can remain in this new form as long as it wishes. A Sivak
can change back to its normal form at any time. but cannot
shapechange again until it kills another victim.

 

 

ee
a ae

 

 

Sivaks use their shapechanging ability to explore or spy in
lands hostile to draconians. A shapechanged Sivak can penetrate
deep into a enemy stronghold, or it can secretly observe human-
oid enemies. A shapechanged Sivak can kidnap an opponent, de-
stroy him, then shapechange to the form of this victim.

Sivaks attack with both claws for 1d6 points of damdge each
and with their long, heavy tails for 2d6 points of damage (the tails
can strike opponents on any side). They also use a variety of
weapons, including long swords, two-handed swords, battle
axes, and spears. A favorite weapon is a Sivak-designed sword
with barbed notches on each edge: this weapon causes Idl0
points of damage. Sivaks also use magical weapons whenever
available.

Sivaks gain a +2 bonus to all saving throws.

What happens to a Sivak when it reaches 0 hit points depends
on the size of its slayer. If the slayer was a humanoid the same size
as or smaller than the Sivak, the slain Sivak shapechanges into
the form of its slayer. It remains in its death shape for three days.
after which time it decomposes into black soot. It the slayer was
not a humanoid or if it was a humanoid larger than the Sivak, the
Sivak immediately bursts into flame upon reaching 0 hp, causing
2d4 points of damage to all within ten feet (no saving throw).

Habitat/Society: Sivak bands usually can be found in secluded
mountain caves. Sivaks are not particularly ambitious. They
make decisions by consensus and spend most of their time way-
laying travelers. They enjoy all types of gambling, wagering
money, food, alcohol, or prisoners on endless card and dice
games. They welcome any opportunity to steal magical items and
are also fond of gems and jewelry.

Ecology: Sivaks are distrustful of other draconian races and
generally avoid them. They sometimes ally with a powerful
Aurak leader or join with a Kapak band tar some recreational
slaughter of the Baar. Sivaks are tend of strong drink, but like the
Baaz, alcohol has no significant effect on their ability to fight.
Sivaks eat virtually anything, and have a special fondness for el-
ven flesh.
Dragons of Krynn

Age RINE

 

 

Dragons are the true children of Krynn, embodying the elemental
forces themselves The most majestic and dignified of all the
world’s creatures, dragons are power incarnate, capable of inspir-
ing awe and fear in all who behold them

White the dragons of Krynn are physically similar to the drag-
ons of other worlds, then- personalities, goals, and philosophies
are quite different.

Background in the beginning, the gods created good, evil, and
neutrality. Conflict among the gods resulted in the All-Saints
war, resolved when the good and neutral gods combined forces
to prevent evil from claiming victory. Good, evil, and neutrality
persist in Krynn to this day, and their balance is crucial to the har-
mony of all things.

The development of good, evil, and neutral dragons paralleled
this balance Just as the neutral gods joined forces with the gods of
good, the neutral dragons aligned with the good dragons to
thwart the plans of the evil dragons. However, the neutral drag-
ons soon grew weary of being drawn into the endless conflicts be-
tween good and evil, and ultimately most of them abandoned
Krynn

While little is known of the neutral dragons today, the influence
of good and evil dragons remains strong. Black, blue, green, red,
and white dragons invariably ally themselves with the forces of
evil. while brass, bronze, copper, gold, and sliver dragons invari-
ably ally themselves with the forces of good.

Three Dragonwars were faught during the Age of Dreams, the
first era of Krynn. In the final Dragonwar, a young Knight of So-
lamnia named Huma was given the secret of the dragonlance, a
powerful weapon capable of destroying dragons Flying a silver
dragon. he battled the evil dragons in the skies, and they were
eventually defeated. To preserve the balance, the good dragons
departed the world. For years afterwart, dragons were unknown
on Krynn existing only as creatures of legend.

Following the Cataclysm (a world-wide disaster of unprece-
dented proportions in which the wrath of the gods descended on
Krynn), Takhisis, the Queen of Darkness, awakened the evil
dragons and took the eggs of the good dragons. The good drag-
ons swore an oath not to interfere with the affairs of Krynn in ex-
change for their eggs safe-keeping, but Takhisis betrayed them by
corrupting their eggs to create the draconians. The good dragons
discovered the Dark Queen’s treachery and declared war on their
evil cousins Fighting side by side with the good people of Krynn,
the good dragons eventually triumphed in the conflict that came
to be known as the War of the Lance.

In the years following the War of the Lance, the good dragons
seemingly disappeared again from the face of Krynn. In fact,
many of the good dragons had succumbed to a mysterious dis-
ease, while others had been summoned to their ancestral home to
defend against an anticipated attack. Taking advantage of the ab-
sence of good dragons, Takhisis made another attempt to conquer
Krynn. But with the aid of the good people of Krynn, the good
dragons were able to cure the disease that was killing them, secure
their ancestral home, and rally their forces to stop Takhisis.
Though the good dragons continue to persevere, their constant
vigilance is required to hold the threat of evil in check.

Dragons and Men Perhaps the most striking difference be-
tween the dragons of Krynn and the dragons of other worlds is,
their relationship with men and women. Where other dragons are
reclusive and withdrawn, seldom involvmg themselves with the
affairs of other races, the fates of Krynn dragons and Krynn men
and women have been mexorably linked since the dawn of time
This is as true of the evil drgons as it ot the good dragons The
evil dragons maintain close ties with evil humans and demihu-
mans and have worked closely with them in the past to realize
then- common goals of conquest and subjugation In turn, the
good dragons ally themselves with the forces of good to counter

the evil dragons and to further the causes of justice and honor.

Further, a mystical bond exists between good dragons and
good people. This bond is based on mutual trust, respect, and co-
operation. When the bond is strong, both dragons and people
flourish, able to function at the peak of their talents and abilities.
Rut when the bond is threatened by doubt, disrespect, or dishar-
mony, both dragons and people suffer and regress.

Dragon Culture The dragons of Krynn have a rich cultural her-
itage. Although this is not generally known to the human popula-
tion of Krynn, brilliant dragon scholars have excelled over the
ages in areas as diverse as astronomy, mathematics, history, and
philosophy. There have even been a small but notable number of
dragon artists who have created magnificent poetry, beautiful
music, and stirring literature. Though the good dragons have es-
pecially strong academic and aesthetic talents, the evil dragons
also have produced scholars and artists whose works rival those
of any other race.

Dragons have an oral instead of a written tradition, and most
of their philosophy, history, and literature is passed from genera-
tion to generation by word of mouth. But like other races with a
rich culture, the dragons keep much of their heritage alive by pre-
serving it in sculptures, paintings, and other works of art. These
art works not only enrich the lives of the dragons with their sheer
beauty, they also serve as permanent records of important ideas
and events. They are among the dragons’ greatest treasures.

Age Categories and Die Modifiers: Like the dragons of other
worlds, the Hit Dice and combat modifiers of Krynn dragons
vary among subspecies and are modified based on age category;
this information is listed on the following Dragon Table. Combat
modifiers apply to both attack and damage rolls for each physical
attack, but these do not apply to a dragon’s breath weapon. Sav-
ing throws are also tied to their Hit Dice: each dragon saves as a
watrior equal in level to the drgon’s Hit Dice.

Krynn dragons’ Hit Dice bases are identical to those of other
worlds, as described in the first Monstrous Compendium vol-
ume. (For instance, a Krynn copper dragon and a Hit Dice base of
13, the same as his counterpart on other worlds. A hatchling cop-
per dragon subtracts 6 dice, for a total of 7 Hit Dice; it saves as a
7th level warrior.)

Krynn dragons pass through the various age categories at a
slightly slower rate than the dragons of other worlds, as shown
on the Dragon Table. Though Krynn dragons cause tear in other
creatures much like the dragons of other worlds, their tear auras
are not as strong as those of other dragons: their fear radii and the
modifiers affecting their victims’ saving throws are summarized
on the Dragon Table.

Attacks and Defenses: Krynn dragons have the same defense
and attack abilities as their other-world counterparts, including
spellcasting, breath weapons, physical dttacks. and enhanced
senses. These are detailed in the first Monstrous) Compendium
volume.

Traits: Krynn dragons have the same characteristics,
physical appearance, and statistics as their counterparts on other
worlds. These similarities include alignment, Armor Class, treasure
type, and experience points given in the subspecies listings in the first
Monstrous Compendium volume. Ecological details, such as those
pertaining to their lairs, metabolisms, and families, are also similar,
as are their general combat tactics. However, Krynn dragons have
different attitudes and philosophies than dragons from other worlds;
these differences are summarized below.

The Evil Dragons

Black Dragons: Impulsive and nervous, black dragons tend to
act first and think later. There are fewer black dragon scholars
and artists than any other subspecies of Krynn dragon. Black
Dragons of Krynn

— Prag INI TRICE Cae -

 

dragons are extremely independent and ally with other races only
if it serves their purposes; hence, they are seldom used by evil
forces in times of war. Black dragons move silently and _ strike
quickly. Their favorite spell is darkness, which is used to cover
their movements during attacks.

Blue Dragons: Although blue dragons live in caves, they prefer
to dwell in deserts and arid lands. More gregarious than many of
their cousins, blue dragons serve as line quality troops in times of
warfare. Blue dragons believe they are the gods’ favorites.

Blue dragons are wise enough to see the importance of coopera-
tion, and thus are valued allies in times of warfare. Most dra-
gonriders are mounted on blue dragons. The loyalty felt among
the members of a blue dragon squad can be so profound that loss
of a companion can plunge the survivors into deep depressions,
sometimes to the point of hindering their effectiveness on the bat-
tlefield. Though highly adept spellcasters and skilled fighters with
their teeth and claws, the blue dragons’ favorite attack is their
lighting breath.

Green Dragons: Green dragons are notorious even among evil
dragons for their cruel natures and vicious tempers. Green drag-
ons have few concerns beyond their own immediate desires. Un-
abashed hedonists, they relish treasure, rich foods and sensual
pleasures. They are clever and subtle combatants. Green dragons
obey orders only from leaders whom they respect. A leader who
loses the respect of a green dragon may soon find himself between
the dragon’s jaws.

Green dragons prefer to use trickery and magic on an enemy in-
stead of an all-out assault, but they engage in bloody melee when
necessary.

Green dragons are rarely used in major offensives, but are of-
ten used for assassinations and other sinister assignments.

Red Dragons: Red dragons are the strongest and most fearsome of
all evil dragons. Their intelligence exceeds that of blue dragons.
They cooperate with other dragons as necessary, but they refuse to
obey orders with which they disagree. Red dragons see no grand de-
sign to the multiverse; to them, existence is a random mix of chaos
and disorder in which only the strongest can survive.

Red dragons enjoy nothing more than setting cities ablaze, and
then rummaging through the rubble for loot. Though leery of most
leaders, they are loyal to the Queen of Darkness. Red dragons work
well together. Unless it is in their best interest to take prisoners, red
dragons hunt down and destroy their enemies to the last.

White Dragons: White dragons are the least able of all the evil
aragons. They have little or no interest in art, and only a periph-
eral interest in the grand schemes of their evil cousins. In most
cases, white dragons would prefer to be left alone. In times of
war, white dragons are used as scouts or are assigned to defend re-
gions of the least strategic importance. Though slow to react,
white dragons can be effective fighters, relying heavily on their
breath weapons to weaken opponents before closing to attack
with their teeth and claws.

The Good Dragons

Brass Dragons Brass dragons believe that life is a series of tests and
designed to weed out the weak from the strong. Though
benevolent and understanding of creatures they consider to be infe-
rior, brass dragons believe that ultimately the superior should be al-

lowed to flourish Generally considered to be the least sophisticated
of all of the good dragons, brass dragons have little interest in art or
culture, instead devoting themselves to developing strategies for-
dealing with the unavoidable hardships of existence They are good
fighters, preferring to attack with claws and teeth, reserving their
breath weapons and spells for emergencies.

Dragons: Bronze dragons are fond of war and fighting
Bronze dragons are also extremely interested in the affairs of man-
kind. In ancient times, bronze dragons were believed to take the
forms of domestic animals simply to study the cultures of men.

Though not particularly deep thinkers, bronze dragons believe
that concepts such as good and evil can be understood intuitively.
Logic can actually impair understanding, since the universe 15 not
a logical place.

Copper Dragons: Copper dragons adhere to no particular philos-
ophy and are easily influenced by the opinions of other. They are
extremely fond of wealth, almost alwavs demanding to know how
cooperating with others will benefit them They seldom make deci-
sions of consequence without first consulting other dragons In
spite of their selfishness, copper dragons are basically kind-
hearted. They are loyal to their friends, but distrustful of strangers.
In combat, they freely attack with both breath weapons.

Dragons: Because of their devotion to the intellect gold
dragons have produced many fine scholars, particularly in the
fields of mathematics and philosophy. Though gold dragons re-
spect all Intelligent creatures regardless of their species they
rarely associate with other races-the arrogant gold dragons con-
sider such associations to be demeaning. Gold dragons are ex-
tremely skilled in magic and prefer to attack with their spells

Silver Dragons: Silver dragons believe that the purpose of life is
devotion to the standards of good. They believe in the sanctitv of
life and that all creatures are equal in the eyes of the gods. The)
go to war only reluctantly, but they are fully prepared to give
their lives for a cause in which they believe.

Silver dragons are the dragons most beloved by the races of
Krynn. They can polymorph into human or elven form and
sometimes seem to prefer these forms to their own They enjoy
the company of humans and help them whenever they can.

Dragon Table

Hit Die Combat Fear

Save
Category Age Modifier Radius Modifier
1 Hatchling 0-7 yrs -6 +1 7 —
2 Very Young 8-20 =A +2 _ ~
3 Young 21-35 -2 +3 - 7
4 Juvenile 36-70 “1 +4 ~ ~
5 Young Adult 71-120 Nil *5 140 yards +4
6 Adult 121-250 +1 76 45 yards + 3
7 Mature Adult 251-500 +2 +7 20 yards +2
8 Old 501-750 +3 +8 95 yards +1
9 Very Old 751-1000 iS +9 30 years 0
10 Venerable 1. 001-1200 +5 +10 440 yards “i
11 Wyrm 1.201-1.400 +6 +11 40 yards -2
12 Great Wyrm 1.401+ +7 +12) 45 yards -3
Dragon, Amphi

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN:

FREQUENCY:
ORGANIZATION:
ACTIVITY CYCLE:
DIET:
INTELLIGENCE:
TREASURE:
ALIGNMENT:

Tropical subbtropical and
temperate/Ocean

Rare

Solitary

Any

Special

Very (11-12)

Special

N’eutral evil

 

NO. APPEARING:
ARMOR CLASS:
MOVEMENT:

HIT DICE:

THACO:

NO. OF ATTACKS:
DAMAGE/ATTACK:
SPECIAL ATTACKS:

1-4

3 (base)

6. Sw 24

9 (base)

11 (at 9 HD)

3 + special

1-8/1-8/2-20

Tongue, breath weapon, and

magical abilities

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Variable

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Variable

SIZE: H (25’ base length)

MORALE: Champion (16 base)

XP VALUE: Variable

Age Body Breath Treas. X.P.
Cat. Length (’) AC Weapon MR Type _ Value
1 4-7 6 1d6+1 — — 1,400
2 7-11 5 2d6+2 _ aa 2,000
3 11-19 4 3d6+3 — = 3,000
4 19-27 3 4d6+4 — % F 4,000
5 27-36 2 5d6+5 10% F 7,000
6 36-45 1 6d6+6 15% F 8,000
7 45-54 0 7d6+7 20% Hd 10,000
8 54-63 -1 8d6t8 25% Fx2 11,000
9 63-72 -2 9d6+9 30% Fx2 12,000
10 72-81 -3 10d6+10 35% Fx2 13,000
11 81-90 -4 Id6 + 11 40% Fx3 14,000
12 90-102 5 12d6+12 45% Fx3 15,000

A unique crossbreed between a green dragon and a sea dragon,
the amphi dragon is one of the most cruel and repulsive denizens
of the ocean, sharing the green dragons’ hatred of all good-
aligned creatures.

Though it has the smooth and flexible, deep green scales of a
green dragon, the amphi dragon more closely resembles a giant
toad with tiny, vestigial wings and webbed feet. Bony ridges sur-
round its beady black eyes, and yellow warts cover its body.
When encountered on land, the rotten egg odor of the amphi
dragon is detectable as much as 100 yards away.

Amphi dragons speak their own tongue, as well as the tongue
common to all evil dragons. Additionally, amphi dragons can
communicate with any human or demihuman race.

Combat: The amphi dragon cannot fly, and it moves only awk-
wardly on land. However, on land it can leap a horizontal dis-
tance of 18 feet or a vertical distance of six feet once every other
round. It cannot move on the round following a leap.

The amphi dragon generally avoids the land, however, prefer-
ring to nestle itself in the mud of the ocean floor and wait for vic-
tims. It attacks with little or no provocation, and creatures of any
size are potential victims. It uses its breath weapon first, then
closes for fore claw and bite attacks. It attempts tongue strikes at
solitary opponents, particularly ones smaller than itself. The am-
phi dragon may intentionally prolong its attacks to savor the
death throes of a doomed victim.

 

 

 

 

Breath Weapon and Special Abilities: An amphi dragon’s
breath weapon is a stream of acid 60 feet long and three feet wide.
Damage caused by the breath weapon varies with the dragon's
age (see earlier table). Victims caught in the blast must roll saving
throws vs. breath weapon, with success indicating half damage.
The breath weapon is equally effective underwater and in the
open air and can be used once every three combat rounds.

From birth, the amphi dragon can breathe both water and air.
It can change the color of its skin to match the surroundings. If it
remains stationary while camouflaged, it is undetectable 80% of
the time.

The amphi dragon’s warts continually ooze acid. Each time a
character attacks the dragon in melee, he must roll a Dexterity
check. If he fails, he suffers 1d6 points of damage.

The amphi dragon can attempt a tongue strike, up to a distance
of two feet times its age category, to capture a victim. If the amphi
dragon succeeds in an attack roll against AC 10, the victim is
stuck to its tongue and is pulled to its mouth at the end of the
round. If the tongue suffers 12 or more points of damage, the am-
phi dragon releases its prey. Otherwise, the victim is automati-
cally bitten in each subsequent round. When the victim is reduced
to 0 hit points, the amphi dragon swallows it on the next round.

As they age, amphi dragons gain the following additional abili-
ties, useable once per day:

Adult: detect magic
Old: suggestion
Wyrm: darkness, 15" radius

Habitat/Society: Too lazy to construct elaborate lairs, amphi
dragons live in sunken ships or empty underwater caves. They
are shunned by all other ocean-swelling creatures, including
other amphi dragons. Female amphi dragons abandon their new-
borns within a few days after birth, and only about 25% survive.

Ecology: Amphi dragons eat virtually anything, but they prefer
live prey, especially Dargonesti and Dimernesti (sea elves). They
scavenge refuse from the ocean floor and also eat algae, seaweed,
fish, and minerals.
Dragon, Astral

 

cumargreReAt.

   
     

inrrewucenee, a) ad
No arreanine 1 20 0
mrovemerer Saw ane
Damacyartack tar 4/212

fe Sas tng)
Monat Sesdy 13)

 
   

Dragon, Kodragon

cumargreRean

DAMAGHATTACK

 
Dragon, Othlorx

full rm a 4
—< pra ON CHCe +
ee a $ adL 4

 

 

The othlorx are variations of the stand. and dragons that appear
in the world of Krynn. Physically they are identical to the existing
dragon forms—brass, bronze, copper, and silver; black, blue,
green, white, and red-though there are no gold othlorx. The dif-
ference is in their attitudes toward the world and other dragons.

The othlorx are part of the outcome of a choice faced by
dragonkind, the choice created by Takhisis and the Wars of the
Lance. When Takhisis released the evil dragons into Krynn, she
expected all of her children (as she saw them) to come and fight at
her side. Perhaps fortunately for the forces of good, the evil drag-
ons were true to their natures. Not all heeded her commands.
More than a few saw no gain for themselves in the battles to
come, only the greater chance of death and misery. So they
refused to come and fight at her side. Infuriated, Takhisis cursed
these renegade dragons, causing them to become the first of the
othlorx.

When the good dragons were bound by their oath to not inter-
fere in the Wars of the Lance, they set out to search for their lost
eggs. They traversed the globe, and more than a few scoured Ta-
ladas. Eventually the draconian hatcheries were discovered and
the good dragons no longer felt compelled to honor their oath.
They returned to Ansalon to take part in the war. However, not
all the good dragons felt compelled to return. Some, especially
those who had never laid a brood of eggs, refused and chose to re-
main in Taladas. They were shunned by their brothers and so
joined the ranks of the othlorx.

The characteristics of the othlorx vary according to the dragon
type and the individual personality of the creature. General be-
haviors of each are described below.

Black Dragons: These great beasts have found the southern wil-
derness of Taladas to be an ideal home with its vast marshes and
steaming jungles. Originally selfish and loners, as othlorx they
have become xenophobic in the extreme. Takhisis’s curse has
made them crazed and completely unpredictable. In general, they
attack all but an obviously superior enemy on sight, but there are
tales of times when they have been cordial, if highly eccentric.
Othlorx black dragons cannot cast any priest spells. They are
chaotic neutral.

Blue Dragons: There are few blue dragons among the othlorx,
their naturally lawful (though evil) natures compelled the
majority of them to heed Takhisis’s call. Still, even among these
honor-bound creatures there were some skillful enough to claim a
loophole or create some elaborate justification for their refusal.
Enraged, Takhisis stripped these blue dragons of their priest spells
and has compelled them to forever honor their words, precisely,
no matter what the statement or intention.

Already hostile to man, the blue othlorx now blame all their
woes on the humans (who caused the Dragonwars anyway).
They don’t necessarily attack on sight, but they use all their abili-
ties to cause harm and woe to this offensive race. Blue othlorx are
extremely lawful evil.

Brass Dragons: For the brass dragons, becoming othlorx was
not that difficult a decision. Always prone to be somewhat neu-
tral, they readily allowed this side of their nature to become dom-
inant. Although not cursed for their choice, they are shunned and
repudiated by others of their kind. This has hurt them greatly, for
they are highly social creatures. Isolated from their own kind,
they sometimes become desperate for companionship and con-
versation. They have been known to visit the nomadic tribes of
the steppes, simply to converse and gossip. Many are known by
name to the tribesmen. They are neutral (good).

Bronze Dragons: Most of these enigmatic creatures, being both
I and good, responded to the call to battle the horrors of the
evil dragons. However, some did not come, primarily because
they never heard the call. Their friends and contacts are the crea-
tures of the sea, mostly unaffected by the wars. Thus the news of
the great battles never reached their ears. On rare occasions,

these dragons appear land. They can display an amazing igno-
norance of current affairs and are considered somewhat backward
rance of current affairs and are considered somewhat backward
by their dragon fellows. They hate minotaurs with a violent pas-
sion. Bronze othlorx are lawful good, but seldom involve them-
selves in worldly affairs.

Copper Dragons: Copper othlorx, who in the past have prided
themselves on their fine sense of humor, have become somewhat
bitter and disenchanted with dragonkind in general since refusing
to come to the aid of all good dragons. They see themselves as be-
ing unfairly treated, especially for something that’s over and done
with. They have no love of their fellow dragons nor any who pro-
fess to aid or support the dragon cause. Indeed, they delight in
tormenting and irritating those good dragons they find, although
they still will not cause permanent harm to their fellows.

Shunned by their fellows, the copper othlorx have taken a
fancy to the gnomes of Taladas. They find the little fellows vastly
amusing, recognizing the minoi for the cosmic joke they really
are. Copper othlorx are chaotic good (neutral).

Green Dragons: The green othlorx are obsessive, cruel, and
malevolent creatures, indeed hardly different from their uncursed
fellows. Since they were unwilling to leave their sheltered groves,
Takhisis found her revenge by binding them to those very lands.
The green othlorx are filled with a violently territorial passion.
Anything, including another of their own kind, is treated as a
trespasser to be destroyed. This protectiveness keeps them from
straying far or successfully mating. Their numbers have suffered
a steady decline.

Red Dragons: Most of the red dragons, consumed by war-lust,
eagerly went off to fight in the Wars of the Lance. However, a few
who saw opportunities suddenly arise on Taladas refused to go
Takhisis cursed these creatures with a loss of the trait they most
pride—their — self-confidence.

The red othlorx are a strange lot. They are powerful creatures,
still possessed with a great desire for wealth and bloodshed, but
they doubt their own abilities and might. As a result, they have
become skulkers, attacking from ambush and using every cow-
ardly trick possible to overcome their fears of inferiority. When
not in combat, they are excessively vain and boastful, again to
compensate. If faced by a powerful foe (even one that seems mod-
erately powerful), they will hesitate and wait for a chance to at-
tack with surprise. The red othlorx are considered cowards by
their kin. The red othlorx have no priest spells
Silver Dragons: The silver dragons have always felt a strong
need to aid and assist mankind. Despite this, a considerable num-
ber of them refused the call to war, rationalizing this by claiming
to remain behind to protect the humans of Taladas. While their
motives were true and noble, they could not escape the guilt that
came with their decision. Thus silver dragons are compelled to
atone for their wrongs by traveling among humans in disguise
They are obsessive about helping others and fighting evil when
they find it and try to compel those traveling with them to join
their cause.

They have become the most intolerant of dragon species with a

rigidly defined code of good and evil. Their punishments are se-
vere and final—death is the only fate for evildoers of any type.
The silver othlorx are rigidly good, although they are now cha-
otic not lawful.
White Dragons: Of all the evil othlorx, the dull-witted white
dragons have changed the most. They defied the call out of im-
pulse, refusing because it didn’t suit their mood In return, Takhi-
sis stripped them of all outward signs of intelligence. White
othlorx cannot cast spells or speak. They are still intelligent and
are perfectly aware of the powers they have lost. This only serves
to increase their rage and savageness. They are extremely chaotic
evil.
Dragon, Sea

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical, subtropical, and
temperate/Ocean

FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Special

INTELLIGENCE: Highly (13-14)

TREASURE: Special

ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil

NO. APPEARING: 1-6

ARMOR CLASS: -2 (base)

MOVEMENT: 3, Sw 12

HIT DICE: 15 (base)

THACO: 5

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 + special

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-12/1-12/3-36

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Breath weapon and magical
abilities

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Variable

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Variable

SIZE: G (35’ base length)

MORALE: Fanatic (18 base)

XP VALUE: Variable

Age Body Breath Treas. X.P.
Cat. Diameter (’) AC Weapon MR Type Value
1 4-11 1 1d8+1 = — 2,000
2 11-20 0 2d8+2 - = 5,000
3 20-29 -1 3d8+3 - - 7,000
4 29-38 -2 4d8+4 EC 8,000
5 38-48 -3 5d8+5 20% CH 11,000
6 48-58 -4 6d8+6 25% CH 12,000
7 58-68 5 7d8+7 30 % CH 13,000
8 68-79 -6 8d8+8 35% CHx2 14,000
9 79-90 -7 9d8+9 40% CHx2 15,000
10 90-101 -8 10d8 +10 45% CHx2 16,000
11 101-113 -9 11d8 + 11 50%  CHx3 17,000
12 113-125 -10 12d8+12 55% CHx3 18,000

Related to the dragon turtle, the sea dragon resembles a giant tur-
tle with a dragon’s head and massive flippers. A thick shell, usu-
ally black or dark green, covers most of its body. Its webbed toes
and paddlelike flippers make land travel difficult. The sea dragon
has no teeth.

Sea dragons speak their own tongue, and also the languages of
fishes and evil dragons. They can also converse with any human
or demihuman.

Combat: Any creature appearing in a sea dragon’s territory
without permission is considered to be an enemy. The sea dragon
attacks with its breath weapon and front flippers, closing to finish
off a wounded opponent with its powerful jaws.

A sea dragon attempts to capsize unauthorized vessels entering
its territory. To determine the sea dragon’s chance of capsizing a
vessel, divide the dragon’s size by the ship’s size and multiply by
100. (For instance, if a 50-foot sea dragon attempts to capsize an
200-foot ship, it has a 25% chance of success.) This chance never
exceeds 95% -a sea dragon always has a 95% chance of capsiz-
ing a ship the same size as itself or smaller.

Knowledgeable sailors crossing a sea dragon’s territory often
dump barrels of treasure overboard in hopes of placating it. Usu-
ally, anything less than the ship’s entire cargo is considered an in-
sult. Once the ship is capsized, the sea dragon tries to kill all of the
ship’s passengers.

Breath Weapon and Special Abilities: A sea dragon’s breath
weapon is a cone of steam 50 feet long that is five feet wide at the

 

 

 

 

dragon’s mouth and 30 feet wide at the base. Damage caused by
the breath weapon varies with the dragon’s age (see table above).
A victim of the blast can roll a saving throw vs. breath weapon;
success means only half damage was suffered. The breath weapon
is as effective underwater as it is in the open air and can be used
once every three combat rounds.

From birth, a sea dragon can breathe both water and air. It pos-
sesses a type of sonar that enables it to detect creatures and ob-
jects of man-size or larger up to 360 feet away in the water.

Once per day, a sea dragon has the scaly command power over
a variable number of scaly creatures with animal intelligence or
less (primarily reptiles and fishes) living in the water within a
half-mile radius. The number of creatures under scaly command
is 4d10 times the age category of the dragon. This control lasts for
2d6 turns and cannot be dispelled. No saving throws are allowed.
Creatures under the scaly command of one sea dragon cannot fall
under the control of another. Additionally, scaly creatures will
never voluntarily attack a sea dragon.

As they age, sea dragons gain the following additional abilities,
all useable three times per day:

Adult: light
Old: entangle
Wyrm: suggestion

Habitat/Society: A sea dragon’s territory is an area of several
hundred square miles of ocean. Unless pursuing an enemy or lay-
ing eggs, a sea dragon rarely leaves its territory. Its lair is usually
an immense stone castle on the ocean floor. Two sea dragons
never share the same territory or lair, except during the annual
mating season, a period of approximately three weeks.

A female sea dragon lays as many as 300 eggs in a deep nest on
a sandy beach. After laying the eggs, she buries them, then re-
turns to the ocean. The warm sun hatches the eggs, a process tak-
ing about eight weeks. However, it is rare that more than a few of
the hatchlings survive.

Ecology: Essentially herbivorous, sea dragons mainly eat algae
and seaweed, but also enjoy the occasional fish, mineral chunk,
or swimming sailor. Their eggs are considered delicacies by many
races, particularly the minotaurs of Mithas.

 
Dreamshadow

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: As creature or person mimicked

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: As creature or person mimicked

ACTIVITY CYCLE: As creature or person mimicked

DIET: Nil

INTELLIGENCE: As the dreamer

TREASURE: As creature or person mimicked
(but illusionary)

ALIGNMENT: As creature or person mimicked

 

NO. APPEARING: Variable

ARMOR CLASS: As creature or person mimicked
MOVEMENT: As creature or person mimicked
HIT DICE: As creature or person mimicked
THACO: As creature or person mimicked

NO. OF ATTACKS: As person or creature mimicked
DAMAGE/ATTACK: As person or creature mimicked
(but illusionary)

As person or creature mimicked
(but illusionary)

SPECIAL DEFENSES: As person or creature mimicked
MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below

SPECIAL ATTACKS:

SIZE: As person or creature mimicked
MORALE: As person or creature mimicked
XP VALUE: As person or creature mimicked

+ 10%

Dreamshadows are illusionary creations that take the appearance
of any real person or creature known to the dreamer or to anyone
experiencing the dream. They are quite believable and in all ways
appear to be the actual person or creature. They are normally en-
countered as a result of a mindspin spell (see the “Dreamwraith”
entry for details).

A dreamshadow can be of any alignment and can either be
helpful or harmful to those experiencing it. It can appear as a
monster (such as a whisper spider or an undead beast), a member
of an intelligent race (such as an elf or a draconian), or even as the
dreamer himself. Not only does a dreamshadow have the shape
of the creature or person it mimics, it also has the same alignment
and personality. An ogre dreamshadow, for instance, will proba-
bly be stupid and hostile, while a Solamnic Knight dreamshadow
will probably be stern and honorable. A character encountering a
dreamshadow of himself will discover that the dreamshadow
shares the identical equipment, clothing, and physical features,
but not necessarily the same knowledge and information.

It is extremely difficult to distinguish dreamshadows from their
non-illusionary counterparts, but since dreamshadows always re-
tam the intelligence of the dreamer some dreamshadows can ex-
hibit peculiar aberrations. For instance, a chicken that scratches a
message in the dirt or an ogre who speaks with eloquence and pre-
cision might alert the observer that he is dealing with a dreamsha-
dow instead of the actual creature.

Combat: A dreamshadow attacks with the same weapons, abil-
ities, strategies, and ferocity as its non-illusionary counterpart.
However, a dreamshadow causes partially illusionary damage.
This damage is equal to 1 hit point of real damage per 4 points of
illusionary damage (for instance, if a character takes 12 points of
illusionary damage, he experiences it as 3 hit points of real dam-
age). Note that while a character is in the dream he believes illu-
sionary damage to be genuine and therefore drops to the ground
as though lifeless after taking what he believes to be the appropri-
ate damage. When a character believes he has suffered a fatal
amount of damage, he “dies.” The illusionary nature of the dam-
age is apparent only after his companions successfully end the
dream or the dream is otherwise dispelled.

 

 

 

 

 

Spells cast by magic-using dreamshadows have effects on char-
acters equivalent to actual spells. A fireball cast by a dreamsha-
dow dragon does a comparable amount of illusionary damage. A
dreamshadow gorgon turns a character to stone until the dream is
ended.

Dreamshadows cannot be disbelieved into non-existence.
However, if a dreamshadow is disbelieved before it conducts its
first attack against a character, the character suffers no illusion-
ary damage. A character cannot disbelieve a dreamshadow once
he has suffered illusionary damage from it (see the
“Dreamwraith” entry for information about disbelieving illu-
sions).

Characters can use their weapons and spells against a dream-
shadow just as they would against its non-illusionary counter-
part. the dreamshadow suffers normal damage, not illusionary
damage. When a dreamshadow is reduced to 0 hit points, it is de-
stroyed.

Dreamshadows have no magic resistance in the first level of a
mindspin dream, 10% magic resistance in the second level, and
20% in the third level (see the “Dreamwraith” entry for informa-
tion about the mindspin levels).

Habitat/Society: A dreamshadow has no meaningful existence
beyond that as experienced by the dreamer. Hence, even if a
dreamshadow survives an encounter with a character or adven-
turing party, for all practical purposes it ceases to exist when the
dream is ended. Dreamshadows collect illusionary treasure; their
treasure items have no value for non-illusionary characters and
cannot be taken from the dream.

Ecology: Dreamshadows interact with one another as_ they
would in the non-illusionary world, for instance, a dreamshadow
farmer might be tending a flock of dreamshadow sheep, while a
band of dreamshadow hunters might be stalking a dreamshadow
ice bear. But dreamshadows only appear to eat, drink, and sleep,
since their physiological functions are all illusionary
Dreamwraith

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: As creature or person mimicked
FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: As creature or person mimicked
ACTIVITY CYCLE: As creature or person mimicked
DIET: Nil

INTELLIGENCE: As creature or person mimicked
TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil

NO. APPEARING: 1-4

ARMOR CLASS: 3

MOVEMENT: As creature or person mimicked
HIT DICE: 8

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-10 or by weapon (illusionary)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: — -1 bonus to initiative roll
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below

SIZE: As person or creature mimicked
MORALE: Very steady (14)

XP VALUE: 2,000

Dreamwraiths are violent creations of the subconscious. They as-
sault the minds of their victims through powerful illusionary at-
tacks.

A dreamwraith can appear in a number of forms, usually hu-
manoid, but almost always frightening and repulsive. It often
takes the form of the dead, decaying visage of a character’s
former friend or ally. Dreamwraiths are normally encountered as
a result of a mindspin spell (see following).

Combat: Although their forms can vary, the AC and Hit Dice of
dreamwraiths are always the same. Dreamwraiths despise all
non-illusionary creatures of good or neutral alignment and are
devoted to their destruction. Intelligent and cunning,
dreamwraiths strike with surprising fury, often catching their vic-
tims off-guard. Dreamwraiths gain a -1 bonus to all initiative
checks.

Occasionally, a character may encounter a dreamwraith with
the ability to cause despair. Such a dreamwraith will tell the char-
acter a tale of hopelessness and discouragement If the character
succeeds in a saving throw vs. spell, he resists the hypnotic effect
of the dreamwraith’s words. If he fails the saving throw, the char-
acter is overwhelmed with despair. He joins the dreamwraith, re-
peating the litany of hopelessness. Only a dispel magic spell or a
convincing speech about hope and courage can negate the de-
spair. There iS a base chance of 30% that the speech negates the
despair At the DM’s discretion, the base chance may be modified
as much as + 70% if the speech is particularly inspiring.

The chilling touch of a dreamwraith inflicts 1d10 points of
damage. They also employ a variety of weapons, most often long
swords, battle axes, and daggers However, the damage from
both the touch and the weapons is illusionary, equal to 1 hit point
of real damage per 4 points of illusionary damage. As with the il-
lusionary damage of a dreamshadow, a character suffering illu-
sionary damage perceives the damage to be real, “dying” when he
believes he has suffered a fatal amount of damage. The illusion-
ary nature of the damage is apparent only after the dream has
ended.

Dreamwraiths take normal damage from a characters weap-
ons and spells, ceasing to exist when reduced to 0 hit points.

Dreamwraiths have normal magic resistance in the first level of

 

mindspin dream, 10% magic resistance in the second level, and
20% in the third level. Because they are not undead, they cannot
be turned.

If a dreamwraith is disbelieved before it conducts its first attack
on a character, the character suffers no illusionary damage. A
character cannot disbelieve a dreamwraith once he has suffered il-
lusionary damage from it

Disbelieving Illusions: A character can attempt to disbelieve
dreamwraiths and dreamshadows. Each disbelief attempt re-
quires the following steps:

1. The disbelieving character announces how many melee
rounds he intends to concentrate on the suspected illusion.

2. The modifier for the disbelief check is determined, based on
the length of uninterrupted concentration. The character can per-
form no other actions while concentrating. Note that the concen-
tration time is extremely limited if the illusion attacks the
character while he is concentrating.

Concentration Modifiers for Illusion Disbelief

Time Modifier
1 round +1
2 rounds +2
3 rounds +3
4-6 rounds +4
7-9 rounds +5
1-3 turns +6
4-6 turns +7
1+ hours +8

3. Determine the Disbelief Number by adding the concentra-
tion modifier to the characters intelligence Add 1 for every other
character who has successfully disbelieved during any previous
round. If the character is attempting to disbelieve a dreamwraith,
there is a -5 penalty.

4. The DM secretly rolls 1d20. It the result is higher than the
Disbelief Number, then the entity in question looks real and its ef-
fects are perceived as real. It the result is equal to or lower than
the Disbelief Number, then the illusion is disbelieved

A disbelief check can be made only once per hour by a charac-
ter against any single illusion however, the character-can check
Dreamwraith

ORC le jon dice

 

again whenever another character in his group makes a successful
check. If an illuslon is a group of entities, then the check is made
for the entire group Characters who successfully disbelieve can-
not be harmed by illusions.

Habitat/Society: A dreamwraith ceases to exist when the dream
in which he resides has ended.

Ecology: Dreamwraiths experience only illusionary physiologi-
cal functions. They are shunned by illusionary creatures of all
alignments, but often ally with other dreamwraiths as well as evil
dreamshadows

 

 

Mindspin (Ilusion/Phantasm)
Seventh-Level Spell

Range: Special

Components: V, 5

Duration: Special

Casting Time: 3 hours

Area of Effect: One person

Saving Throw: Neg.

The mindspin spell isolates the innermost nightmares, fears,
and anxieties of the subject and uses them as the basis of star-
tlingly vivid illusions. The spell requires both the caster and
the victim to remain undisturbed for three hours while the
caster sifts through the victim’s mind to create the illusions.
Any disturbance negates the process. If the victim rolls a suc-
cessful saving throw vs. spell, the spell is also broken (but a
charmed victim is not entitled to a saving throw). For the pur-
poses of dispelling, the mindspin spell is treated as if cast by a
21st—level wizard.

Those within the dream experience it as three separate
levels of reality. Components of the dream are experienced as
the victim or victims move over physical terrain. The terrain
moves along at a rate of one mile per hour, with a maximum
range that depends on the level of the dream and the Intelli-
gence of the character on whom the spell was cast. The first
level extends to a maximum of 20 miles times the character’s
Intelligence. The second level extends to a maximum of one
mile times the character’s Intelligence. The third level extends
to a maximum of 20 feet times the character’s Intelligence.
The dreamer is always a central figure of the dream: all of the
effects of each level of the dream disappear if the dreamer is
awakened.

The first level of the dream alters a character’s perceptions
of space, time, and reality of the immediate area. He may per-
ceive the terrain to be a lush forest when in reality it is a bar-
ren field. A character may actually travel many miles, yet
only perceive himself as having moved a short distance. Time
is equally distorted. He may believe he has been traveling for
only a few minutes, when actually several days have passed.
Dreamwraiths and dreamshadows are common in all levels of
the dream; the character is constantly faced with determining
what is reality and what is illusion.

The second level of the dream distorts a character’s percep-
tion of reality even further, for he can no longer distinguish
which of his companions are real and which are illusions.

The third level is the core of the dream, as a character’s per-
ceptions of himself become distorted. In addition to the et-
fects of the previous two levels, a character must use the
attack and saving throw table of another class: Priests use
rogue tables, Warriors use wizard tables, Wizards use warrior
tables, and Rogues use priest tables.

 

 

 

Additionally, because of the disorienting etfects of the dream
area, certain classes make the following adjustments:

Priest: Subtract Wisdom from 20. Compare the result to
the Ability Score column on the Wisdom Table on page 17 of
the Player’s Handbook (2nd Edition) and use the correspond—
ing Chance of Spell Failure for the character On any roll re—
quiring reterence to the Turning Undead table (page 67, 2nd
Edition Dungeon Master’s Guide). use the following table

Mindspin Priests Turning Undead Table

Type of Level of Priest
Undead 12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9-13 14+
Skeleton = — = FF FO FF FR
Zombie =- - -=- = = = = = = = 2
Ghoul - - = - - = = = = 20 19
Shadow — - - = = —- — — 20 19 13
Wight — - = = = — 20 19 16 10
Ghast — — — — — 20 19 16 13 7
Wraith — — — — 20 19 16 13 10 4
Mummy — — — 20 19 16 13 10 7 t
Spectre - -—- 2 19 16 13 10 7 4 t
Vampire — 20 19 16 13 10 7 4 t t
Ghost 20 19 10 13 10 7 4 t t d
Lich 19 16 13 10 7 t t t dd
Special 16 13 10 7 t t t ddd

Rogue: On any roll requiring the use of a thieving skill, all
successes are counted as failures and all failures are counted
as successes. Otherwise, adjust the rolls normallv.

Wizard: Wizards now cast spells at one level higher than
normal. If this enables a wizard to cast a spell higher than
those he currently know\, he can choose any one spell from
the higher level. The mindspin spell automaticallv gives the
wizard the illusion that he knows this new spell unlike other
spells the wizard casts during the dream, this new spell has

 

 

only illusionary effects.

 

Dragon Orbs: Magical items known as of in could can also in-
duce mindspin spells Dragon orbs are etched crystal
Are 20 inches in diameter when in use. When not in use, the orbs
Shrink to ten inches in diameter. They expand it the command
Words, carved into the surface of the orbs, are spoken.

Dragon orbs contain the essences of dragonkind, which serve
as the source of the orbs’ power. A wizard attempting to use an
orb to summon evil dragons its primary use, must gaze into it
and speak the command words. If the character fails a saving
throw vs spell, he Is charmed by the essence of the orb and suc-
cumbs to a mindspin spell with the effects described above (If the
wizard succeeds in his saving throw any dragon within 1d4 x 10
miles is summoned to the orb and attacks any non-evil creatures
it finds near the orb.)

Each orb can cast cure serious wounds three times per day, cast
continual light at will, and cast detect magic at will. Any charac-
ter who gazes into an orb and speaks the command words knows
these functions. Whenever any of these abilities are used, the us-
ing character must roll a saving throw to avoid the orb’s charm ef-
fect. If the saving throw is successful the check must be made to
see it any evil dragons arrive. Detect magic and detect evil spells
show a positive result if cast upon an orb or a character charmed
by an orb For purposes of dispelling, treat the charm effect as if it
had been cast by an 11th-level wizard.
Dwarf, Daergar

 

CumMaTEy TERRAIN Thapeal slopes and

CemperteSuberanean

Frequency tivommen
Farewucenee, Yams B18
Treasure. Me) 1.0 20 Fi

ALIGNMENT Yaren toasiy tale
Bewon evases ar
Bamckarrack 1 8619 weeran

ne Sieh
onaue re m3,

‘avrg have igh bra chm and month dhske Ts hair
‘Wipwal sete andar Foss Wendl Boat, a da grey cham

Combat Daeiry aw hottomperd and taal Fhe They
se ee wernt nar atthe baled Sem ened
ine Ege aay etn aide Vb en cope

HabluySockiy Daetgar have ested mpracane aang
lem cava ama the Whe Meat Oates
1 satan gloomy. pra Bey donna
Abo 6 of aah sles eat el Fi 18 end ar
Sete fr we helo nis Pais an 3
(for mae soot fe can

Tamang the mos mevsred membe of he Dhergay sacs ave
hes a somo fom tn anes ypu the on

  

 

 

Tey Nee rd fave no peso fection For haa

raul sasxtmum
Fader inn
Pen ~

Mage Rengsde
Tar areas
piled High cay

See athe

Ded Peston

Be nye
AYE means no ge for ha es

“tow meal abe alee modind by 21 pennky fo che

 
Dwarf, Gully

5

ns. hig ee - 4 i
—<ika JON i ooo

 

 

CLIMATE/ TERRAIN: Tropical, subtropical, and

temperate/Plain, swamp, forest,
jungle, hill. and mountain

 

FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Clan
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Varies (3-9)
TREASURE: J (x 4; ®
ALIGNMENT: Varies, but usually chaotic neutral
NO. APPEARING: 2-20
ARMOR CLASS: 7 (10)
MOVEMENT: 6
HIT DICE: 1
THACO: 19
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 or 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4/1-4 (fist/bite) or by weapon
(1-4)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below
SIZE: S (4’ tall)
MORALE: Unsteady (7)
XP VALUE: Varies

Gully dwarves, also known as Aghar, are stupid, filthy, and ob-
noxious.

Gully dwarves are short and squat, averaging four feet in height
and weighing about 100 pounds. Their skin tones range from olive
brown to a light parchment color Males wear long, scruffy beards;
females have cheek hair but no beards. Hair color ranges from dirty
blond to duil black. Eyes can be watery blue, dull green, or hazel.
Gully dwarves have narrower fingers and limbs than other dwarves,
and their skin is often covered with scars, boils, sores, and filth. Pot
bellies are common among both sexes.

The stupidity of gully dwarves is legendary. To a gully dwarf,
any number greater than one is “two,” which simply means “more
than one. ” In spite of their dull minds, gully dwarves take them-
selves quite seriously. They tend to have inflated ideas of their
own importance, and puncturing their egos is almost impossible.

Combat: Since they regard cowardice as a virtue, gully dwarves
have raised groveling to an art form. If confronted by a danger-
ous opponent but not immediately attacked, gully dwarves either
faint, cry, beg for mercy, divulge rivers of information, run away,
or stand and hake. If attacked, gully dwarves defend themselves,
but they something fight with their eyes closed. Gully dwarves
are not above stealing, lying, or bullying, and dirty tricks are
among their favorite tactics

Master scavengers, gully dwarves use any armor and weapons
they happen to recover from garbage dumps or scrap heaps. Pad-
ded and studded leather are commonly worn. Gully dwarves
rarely use weapons other than clubs, daggers, knifes, and hand
axes. A few have learned to use slings.

Habitat/Society: Gully dwarf communities are quite small, sel-
dom exceeding more than 2d10 members. A typical clan of 11
members includes a chieftain (a fighter of level 2-6), about four

Ist-level fighters (one of whom serves as the clans shaman, al-
though he has no magical abilities), one fighter of level 2-4 (or a
thief of the same level range); the rest are females and children
Most clans live in abandoned villages or in the wilderness in old
mines and caves. Others live in slums, refuse dumps, or the sewer
systems of large cities. When several clans live together, the
strongest and cleverest chieftain becomes the local king, whose ti-
tle is produced by adding the prefix “High” to his clan name Each
successive king often calls himself “the First,” owing to the gully
dwarf’s inability to count

Gully dwarves believe magical items are useless because their
magic was put into them by other races. To gully dwarves, the
most powerful items are those that seem to do nothing at all. Ob-
jects such as old bones, rotten fruit, fur balls, and bent sticks are
treasured and venerated. The clan’s shaman keeps these “holy
relics” and administers their use.

Ecology: Other races avoid gully dwarves, but they are occa-
sionally hired to perform menial tasks. Gnomes occasionally hire
them as assassins and spies, even though gully dwarves aren't
particular adept at these jobs. Gully dwarves eat anything Many
gully dwarves keep a pot of stew boiling constantly, throwing
anything dead or nearly dead into the pot.

Gully Dwarf Class Limits

Class Max. Level
Warrior
Fighter 6
Ranger N/E *
Paladin N/E *
Solamnic Knight N/E *
Wizard
Mage (Renegade) N/E *
Illusionist (Renegade) N/E *
Wizard of High Sorcery N/E *
Priest
Cleric (Heathen) N/E *
Druid (Heathen) N/E *
Holy Order of the Stars 5
Rogue
Thief 8
Bard N/E *

* N/E means not eligible for that class

Gully dwarves have all of the special abilities of dwarves listed in
the 2nd Edition Player’s Handbook.

Their initial abilities are generated using special dice rolls. The
minimum and maximum ability scores and the dice to roll for
gully dwarves are as follows:

Ability Roll Minimum Maximum
Strength 4d4 +2 6 18
Dexterity 4d4+2 6 18
Constitution 3d4 3 12
Intelligence 2d4+1 3 9
Wisdom 2d4+1 3 9
Charisma 2d4+1 3 9
Dwarf, Hill (Neidar)

   
 

ry aA, =
() Ca
SUG

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Subtropical and temperate/
Hills and forests

FREQUENCY: Common

ORGANIZATION: Clan

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Varies (3-18)

TREASURE: M (x 2); (G, Q (x 20), R)

ALIGNMENT: Varies, but usually neutral good

 

NO. APPEARING: 1 or clan of 10-100 members

ARMOR CLASS: 6 (10)
MOVEMENT: 6

HIT DICE: 1

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-8 (weapon)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below
SIZE: M (4’-5’ tall)
MORALE: Elite (13)
XP VALUE: Varies

Hill dwarves, also known as Neidar, are the most commonly en-
countered dwarven race on Krynn

Neidar have deep tan to light brown skin, ruddy cheeks, and
bright eyes Their hair is brown, black, or gray, and the majority
of adult males wear long bushy beards and moustaches. They fa-
vor earth toned clothing and knee-high hoots

Neidar tend to be rough and coarse. They are extremely loyal
and honorable, and are capable of deep and lasting friendships.
Neidar have low, rich voices and can sing quite well. They have
an extreme aversion to traveling by water.

Combat: Neidar are reluctant combatants, preferring to let oth-
ers do their fighting for them or, avoiding violent situations alto-
gether. However, when drawn into a battle, Neidar fight with
skill and courage. They usually wear studded leather armor and
carry small shields. Battle axes and daggers are their preferred
weapons.

Habitat/Society: Neidar clans form small villages that consist of
modest houses of thatch, wood, and stone. A typical clan In-
cludes 10d10 members About 40-50% are women and children.
Of the adult males, about 80% are 1st-level fighters, 10% are
2nd- to 4th-level fighters, 5% are 5th-level or higher fighters, and
the rest are rangers and thieves of various levels. Because of their
dwarven roots they are excellent miners, metalsmiths, and
woodworkers. The eldest male serves as clan leader, but most ma-
jor decisions are made by consensus. Unmarried Neidar often set
out on their own, returning to their original clan only occasion-
ally.

The Neidar clan system predates the Cataclysm by hundreds of
years and, true to tradition, different clans seldom associate with
each other. This attitude has not only bred suspicion and a lack of
cooperation among the clans, it has also hindered trade and eco-
nomic development, keeping most clans in relative poverty.

Once part of the society of subterranean dwarves, the Neidar
were cast from their homes in the wake of the Cataclysm that pre-
ceded the Age of Darkness. Forbidden to return to their former
homes, the Neidar were forced to live permanently above
ground Neidar have been reasonably successful at integrating
themselves into Krynn society and are as likely to be found in ur-
ban taverns as in their own modest villages.

 

 

 

 

Ecology: Neidar get along well with humans and kendcr. Some
have established cordial relationships with elves. Howcvcr, most
other dwarven races shun the Neidar, particularly the mountain
dwarves. Fond of animals, they keep kittens, sparrows, and po-
nies as pets. They produce few items of value, but sometimes they
create metal tools and honey candies to sell in human towns.
Neidar have voracious appetites. Favorite dishes include corn-
bread, mushroom soup, and roast kingfisher.

Hill Dwarf Class Limits

Class Max. Level
Warrior
Fighter Unlim
Ranger 8
Paladin N/E *
Solamnic Knight N/E *
Wizard
Mage (Renegade) N/E *
Illusionist (Renegade) N/E*
Wizard of High Sorcery N/E *
Priest
Cleric (Heathen) N/E *
Druid (Heathen) N/E *

Holy Order of the Stars 10

Rogue
Thiet 10
Bard N/ E*

* N/E means not eligible for that class.

Neidar have all of the special abilities of dwarves listed in the 2nd
Edition Player’s Handbook. Their initial ability rolls are modi-
fled by a -1 penalty to Charisma and a + 1 bonus to Constitution
The minimum and maximum ability scores for Neidar are as fol-
lows:

Ability Minimum Maximum
Strength 9 18
Dexterity 3 17
Constitution 14 19
Intelligence 3 18
Dwarf, Mountain (Hylar)

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical subtropical, and
temperate /Subterranean

FREQUENCY: Uncommon

ORGANIZATION: Clan

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Varies (3-18)

TREASURE: M (x 5), Q; (R (x 20), G)

ALIGNMENT: Varies, but usually lawful neu-
tral

NO. APPEARING: 4-24

ARMOR CLASS: 4 (10)

MOVEMENT: 4 (6)

HIT DICE: 1

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-8 (weapon)

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below

SIZE: M (4%’ tall)

MORALE: Elite (13)

XP VALUE: Varies

Mountain dwarves are the oldest of the dwarven races. The best
known and most revered of mountain dwarves are the Hylar.

Hylar have light brown skin, ruddy cheeks, and dark brown,
gray, or green eyes. Their hair is black, gray, brown, or white.
They favor earth tones in their clothing.

Combat: The battlefield skill of the Hylar is legendary. When
they encounter an intelligent opponent, Hylar prefer to parley be-
fore combat. Opponents who surrender with grace are treated
with dignity.

Hylar wear chain mail and carry shields. Preferred weapons in-
clude hammers, spears, battle axes, and light crossbows.

Habitat/Society: Hylar live in fabulous underground cities be-
neath immense mountain ranges. The most famous of all dwar-
ven kingdoms is Thorbardin, a 300-square-mile area in the
Kharolis Mountains.

Mountain dwarves have little interest in the affairs of other
races. In fact, most mountain dwarves have never seen a non-
dwarf They are not interested in helping others unless they can
be shown that the matter affects them directly.

A typical group of 100 Hylar includes 40 Ist- to 2nd-level fight-
ers, 15 3rd- to 4th-level fighters, ten 5th- to 8th-level fighters, five
8th-level or higher fighters, 25 O0-level workers and children, and
five paladins, priests, and thieves of various levels.

Two other dwarven races are closely associated with the Hylar
and often live in the same cities. The Daewar, who are respected
fighters and deter to the Hylar’s leadership. The Klar are hill
dwarves who serve wealthy Hylar in menial roles.

Mountain dwarf leaders are called thanes. Each thane repre-
sents his folk in the Council of Thanes, an organization founded
for the purpose of settling disputes and promoting common inter-
ests. Seats on the Council are held by representatives of the Hy-
lar, Theiwar, Daewar, Daergar, Neidar, Klar, and Aghar. The
dwarves venerate their dead and consider the Kingdom of the
Dead to be represented on the Council. The High King is chosen
by acclamation of the Council and must be ordained by the citi-
zens. Most of the great dwarven kings have been Hylar.

 

 

 

 

 

Ecology: Tension persists between the Hylar and other dwarven
races. They have reasonably good relations with the Qualinesti
elves. Hylar enjoy roasted meats, boiled vegetables, and strong
beer. They rarely trade with other races.

Mountain Dwarf Class Limits

Class Max. Level
Warrior
Fighter Unlim
Ranger N/E *
Paladin 8
Solamnic Knight N/E *
Wizard
Mage (Renegade) N/E *
Illusionist (Renegade) N/E *
Wizard of High Sorcery N/E *
Priest
Cleric (Heathen) N/E *
Druid (Heathen) N/E *
Holy Order of the Stars 10
Rogue
Thief 8
Bard N/E*

* N/E means not eligible for that class

Hylar have all of the special abilities of dwarves listed in the 2nd
Edition Player’s Handbook.

Their initial ability rolls are modified by a -1 penalty to Cha-
risma and a +1 bonus to Constitution. The minimum and maxi-
mum ability scores for Hylar are as follows.

Ability Minimum Maximum
Strength 8 18
Dexterity 3 17
Constitution 12 19
Intelligence 3 18
Wisdom 3 18
Charisma 3 16

 
Dwarf, Theiwar

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical, and
temperate, Subterranean

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Clan

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Carnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Varies (3-18)

TREASURE M (2), (G & 3), R)

ALIGNMENT Varies, but usually chaotic evil

NO APPEARING: 3-30

ARMOR CLASS: 7 (10)

MOVEMENT: 6

HIT DICE: 1

THACO: 19

NO OF ATTACKS: lor2

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-8 (weapon)

SPECIAL ATTACKS See below

SPECIAL DEFENSES* See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below

SIZE: S @ tall)

MORALE: Steady (12)

XP VALUE: Varies

Theiwar are an aggressive and degenerate race of mountain
dwarves

Therwar are human-like in appearance, but shorter and slightly
more muscular Their features are exaggerated and repulsive
Huge bulging eyes, gray or watery blue in color, dominate their
faces Their hair is pale tan or yellow Their skin 1s bone white
with bluish undertones They prefer dark, loose clothing

Therwar are most active at night Sunlight makes them nause-
ated They have poor infravision (30-foot range) Therwar con-
sider themselves to be the highest of all dwarven races and seek to
domunate all of Krynn

Combat: Therwar usually attack in teams of three, hiding to
ambush their opponents from behind Two Thetwar strike the
victim's legs, while the third aims his weapon at the victim's head
A solitary Therwar will avoid attacking a victim larger than him-
self, but if necessary, he will attempt to strike from behind

Savant Therwar will also attack from a concealed position, but
they use spells such as fighimng bolt, cloudkall, and te storm to
weaken their victims before closing to finish them off with melee
weapons

Therwar employ a variety of weapons Their favorites are re-
peating light crossbows (12-foot maximum range, two shots per
round, sicbolt capacity, 1d3 points of damage) Theiwar poison
on the arrows inflicts an additional 2d6, points of damage unless
the victim succeeds in a saving throw vs poison Other common
weapons include hooked fauchards (1d4 points of damage and
25% likely to pull a man-sized or smaller victim off-balance),
spiked bucklers (1d4 points of damage), Therwar aklyses (four-
footlong spiked and hooked weapons that inflict 1d6 points of
damage and are 15% likely to pull a man-sized of smaller victim
off-balance), and daggers They usually wear leather armor but
sometimes use chain matl (AC 5)
Habitat/Society' Therwar inhabit great subterranean realms
Their cttes are often adjacent to those of other dwarven races,
two of their largest strongholds are part of the Hylar-dominated
kingdom of Thorbardin About 40-50% of a group of Hylar are
children and females An average group of 15 adult male Therwar
includes six Ist-level fighter, two 2nd- to 4th-level fighters, two
Bth-level or higher fighters, one savant Therwar, two student sa-
vants, and two paladins and thieves of various levels Addttion-

ally, there is a 30% chance of 30-member group having a 5d8
slaves (Q-level humans)

Savant Therwar have an inherent ability to use magic They are
ather fighters, priests, or thieves of 5th to 8th level, and they
know 1d4+5 of the following spells all 12th level of
ability, affect normal fires, anti-magic shell, blak charm per-

Son, cloudkill, ESP, hypnotic patiern, ie storm, moisibility, leo
tate light, lighting bolt, minor creation, repulsion, shadow,

magic, spider chmb, ventriloguism, wall of fog, wall of force

Apprentice savants, called students, are level 47 while students
spells, savants have two or three magical items while students
have only one stem, typical magical stems include any potion or
seroll, rings of fire resistance moistbility, or spell stormg, any
wand, studded leather #1 or shield +1, any sword with
+3 bonus, bracers of defense, brooch of sheldmg, cloak of pro-
tection students are only 25% likely to be able to use a non

fighter magical item

Ecology Daergar are the only dwarven race that socialize with
the Therwar Thetwar hate all other races, particularly humans

Though they can eat all types of food, Therwar prefer to eat meat
raw or cooked Warrior Thetwar are rumored to eat humans dur-
ing drunken festivals

Theiwar Class Limits

Class Max Level
Warrior
Fighter Unlim
Ranger N/E*
Paladin 8
Solamnie Knight N/E*
Wizard
Mage (Renegade)
Ilusionist_ (Renegade)
Wuard of High Sorcery
Priest
Cleric (Heathen) N/E*
Druid (Heathen) N/E*
Holy Order of the Stars 10
Rogue
Thief 8
Bard N/E*

* N/E means not eligible for that class

Therwar have ail of the special abilities of dwarves listed in the
2nd Edition Player s Handbook

Their instal ability rolls are modified by a -1 penalty to Cha-
nisma and a + 1 bonus to Constitution The minimum and maxi
mum ability scores for Theiwar are as follows

Ability Minintum Maximum
Strength 8 18
Dexterity 3 18
Constitution 12 18
Intelligence 3 18
Wisdom 3 18
Charisma 3 u
Dwarf, Zakhar

—pragonjances

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical, subtropical,
temperate Subterranean

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Clan

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Varies (3-18)

TREASURE: M (x 5); (G, Q (x 20), R)

ALIGNMENT: Varies, but usually neutral

NO. APPEARING: 2-20

ARMOR CLASS: 3 (10)

MOVEMENT: 6

HIT DICE: 1

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-8 (weapon)

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below

SIZE: S (3" tall)

MORALE: Elite (13)

XP VALUE: Varies

Zakhar are a mysterious race of mountain dwarves that has with-
drawn from contact with all other dwarven races.

Zakhar have white skin and clear eyes resembling glass mar-
bles. Their hair is white or gray. Zakhar are smaller than other
dwarves, seldom more than three feet tall. Their arms and legs are
thin. They wear dark robes with bulky hoods concealing most of
their faces, along with skin-tight leather gloves and boots. Their
voices are low and soft, barely above a whisper.

Zakhar are grim, even-tempered, and unfeeling They have no
respect for life other than members of their own race

Combat: Zakhar never leave their homes to look for trouble,
but all intruders are dispatched promptly. They do not parley.
Zakhar first disorient victims with their spells, then strike with
their weapons. Zakhar prefer weapons of their own design,
among them the needle puff (a blowgun firing mineral shards
over a three-foot-diameter area up to ten feet away, 1-2 points of
damage), the slasher mace (a quartz mace with six razor-edged
projections; 1d6 points of damage), and the sickle-hook (a curved
metal bar with hooks that can be thrown up to 30-foot, 1d4 points
of damage)

Habitat/Society: In ancient times, the Zakhar kingdom was es-
tablished beneath the Khalkist Mountains. They originally main-
tained cordial relations with the other mountain dwarf races, but
a few decades after the rise of the Hylar, the Zakhar were ravaged
by mold plague Though the fever affected only Zakhar, the Hy-
lar and other dwarven races severed relations with the Zakhar,
refusing them aid and forbidding them from entering their cities.
The Zakhar withdrew, and their capital was deserted overnight.
An antidote was eventually developed but not before 95% of the
Zakhar population died. Though the mold still exists, those
Zakhar still left are immune to its etfects.

The Zakhar continue to suffer from mold plague, more than
80% of the females are infertile, and those capable of giving birth
can do so only once every five years. The infant mortality rate ex-
ceeds 50%, and 5% of surviving infants are deaf and blind.

A typical group of ten adult male Zakhar consists of five 1st-
level fighters, three 2nd- to 3rd-level fighters, two 4th-level or
higher fighters, and one 4th-level or higher savant Savant
Zakhar have the use of blindness (50-yard range) and deafness;
each of these spells can be cast three times per day The eldest
Zakhar, often the savant, serves as the leader of his group. They

 

 

 

are excellent metalsmiths, sculptors, miners, and poets.

Ecology: Zakhar have completely disassociated themselves
from all other races. They raise small herds of subterranean liz-
ards which they ride. Lizards too old or too uncooperative to ride
are butchered for eating. Zakhar have no taste for alcohol, pre-
ferring a tea.

Zakhar Class Limits

Class Max. Level
Warrior
Fighter Unlim
Ranger N/E *
Paladin N/E*
Solamnic Knight N/E *
Wizard
Mage (Renegade) N/E*
Illusionist (Renegade) N/E*
Wizard of High Sorcery N/E*
Priest
Cleric (Heathen) N/E *
Druid (Heathen) N/E *
Holy Order of the Stars N/E *
Rogue
Thief N/E*
Bard N/E*

* N/E means not eligible for that class.

Zakhar have all of the special abilities of dwarves listed in the 2nd
Edition Player’s Handbook.

Their initial ability rolls are modified by a -1 penalty to Cha-
risma and a +1 bonus to Constitution. The minimum and maxi-
mum ability scores for Zakhar are as follows:

Ability Minimum Maximum
Strength 8 15
Dexterity 3 16
Constitution 11 16
Intelligence 3 18
Wisdom 3 18
Charisma 2 16

 
Elf, High — Qualinesti

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate/ Forest

FREQUENCY: Uncommon

ORGANIZATION: Clan

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Varies (8-18)

TREASURE: M; (E, S (x 1/2), T)
ALIGNMENT: Varies, but usually lawful or

neutral good

 

NO. APPEARING: 10-100
ARMOR CLASS: 5 (10)
MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 1+1
THACO: 19 (18)
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-10 (weapon)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below
SIZE: M (5 tall)
MORALE: Elite (13)
XP VALUE: Varies

The Qualinesti, also known as the Western Elves, are exiles from
the Silvanesti High Elves.

Qualinesti are smaller and darker than the Silvanesti, with eyes
of blue or brown and hair ranging from honey-brown to blonde.
They art nor as strikingly attractive as the Silvanesti. They prefer
earth-toned clothing They have strong, pleasant voices and a
friendly, open manner.

Qualinesti are more sociable than the Silvanesti. However,
they share the Silvanesti’s prejudice toward other races and are
intolerant of interracial marriages.

Combat: Qualinesti are more aggressive than Silvanesti but not
as tactically sophisticated. Still, opponents who underestimate
them soon learn that Qualinesti are courageous, and confident
combatants. Long swords, bows, and spears are among their pre-
ferred weapons. They usually wear chain mail or scale mail and
often carry shields.

Habitat/Society: Qualinesti originally occupied the western re-
gions of the Silvanesti kingdom. They left to form their own com-
munities following a disagreement with their cousins’ policy of
strict caste systems Though the Qualinesti hoped their new
settlements would grow in trade and culture. Their hopes were
dashed by the Cataclysm, which introduced a period of terrorism
and barbarism. The elves were seen as easy prey and the endless
raids devastated their communities.

Many communities still exist in the forests west of the Kharolis
Mountains, but these are small, isolated farming villages.

Today, there is only a single major Qualinesti city —Qualinost.
Four immense spires rise from each corner of the city, all con-
nected by arched bridges. A hilltop in the center of the city con-
tains a dense grove of trees. Next to this grove is the Hall of the
Sky, a huge open square rising above the trees containing an In-
laid map of the adjacent lands. Though most of the private homes
are modest, many are quite ornate.

An average group of Qualinesti includes a variety of all appli-
cable classes and levels, as many as 20% have magical abilities,
and at least 10% are 4th-level or higher fighters.

Qualinesti society is far less structured than that of their
Silvanesti cousins. The Qualinesti are ruled by a Speaker of Suns
who must be a blood relative of Kith-Kanan, the elven leader who
originally established the Qualinesti The Thalas-Enthia is a sen-
ate appointed to represent the various guilds and communities. In
all matters of policy, the Thalas-Enthia brings its recommenda-

 

 

 

 

 

Hae

tions to the Speaker of Suns. “s
Ecology: The Qualinesti trade agricultural and mineral

products with dwarves and humans. Bad feelings still linger with
the Silvanesti. Qualinesti enjoy a wide range of foods, particu-
larly venison, fresh fruits,its, and strong ales.

Qualinesti Class Limits

Class Max. Level
Warrior
Fighter 14
Ranger Unlim
Paladin N/E *
Solamnic Knight N/E *
Wizard
Mage (Renegade) 11
Illusionist (Renegade) N/E *
Wizard of High Sorcery Unlim
Priest
Cleric (Heathen) N/E *
Druid (Heathen) N/E *
Holy Order of the Stars Unlim
Rogue
Thief N/E *
Bard N/E *

* N/E means not eligible for that class.

Qualinesti have all of the special abilities of elves listed in the 2nd
Edition Player’s Handbook.

Their initial ability rolls are modified by a -1 penalty to Consti-
tution and a +1 bonus to Dexterity. The minimum and maximum
ability scores for Qualinesti are as follows:

Ability Minimum Maximum
Strength 7 18
Dexterity 7 19
Constitution 7 18
Intelligence 8 18
Wisdom 6 18
Charisma 8 18
Elf, High—Silvanesti

  

 

ccumarirennain

Sammon evase 20,
Thace wh)
DAMAGHATTACK sen

0

 
 
 
    
    
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
       
    

 
Elf, Wild — Kagonesti

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical, subtropical, and
temperate/Forests and plains

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Tribe

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Varies (3-12)

TREASURE: R, (S)

ALIGNMENT: Varies, but usually chaotic or

neutral good

 

NO. APPEARING: 20-200
ARMOR CLASS: 8 (10)
MOVEMENT: 12 (or 15 if sprinting)
HIT DICE: i+1

THACO: 19 (18)

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-10 (weapon)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below
SIZE: M (5’ tall)
MORALE: Elite (12)

XP VALUE: Varies

Kagonesti (Wild Elves) rejected the civilized trappings of their
cousins, the Qualinesti and Silvanesti, to establish their own wil-
derness settlements

Kagonesti are about the same size as the Qualinesti and
Silvanesti, but they are much more muscular. Their skin is dark
brown, and they draw designs on their faces and exposed skin
with clay and paints. Their hair is dark, ranging from black to
light brown, and occasionally silvery white. Their eyes are hazel.
They wear fringed leather clothes decorated with feathers: they
proudly display beautiful necklaces and bracelets made of silver
and turquoise.

Kagonesti believe that harmony with nature is the key to a full
and happy life. They are fiercely proud of their heritage. Com-
pared to the stoic Silvanesti, Kagonesti are hot-tempered and pas-
sionate.

Combat: While Kagonesti do not initiate wars or attack stran-
gers, they are by no means pacifists.

The Kagonesti’s movement rate increases to 15 when they
sprint in a straight line. Among their favorite weapons are war
hammers, slings, and bows of all sizes. They wear leather armor
and have been known to ride bareback on tame stags (in any
given group of Kagonesti, 20% are riding stags).
Habitat/Society Kagonesti have no _ permanent settlements.
Their villages are temporary structures of animal hide and light
wood, using the boughs of living trees to aid in construction and
camouflage. Each village is home to a tribe of several interrelated
families. About 70% of the tribe are fighters of various levels, the
remainder are 0-level workers and children. The tribe centers
around the chief—the oldest and wisest member—and his family.
The chief makes all decisions for the tribe.

Kagonesti have a more animistic view of the cosmos than most
other races. To honor their dead, Kagonesti float the bodies in ca-
noes, sending them to the open sea. These beliefs have led outsid-
ers to regard the Kagonesti as savages. in fact, their traditions
have ancient, sacred roots.

Ecology: In spite of the wild elves’ peaceful acceptance of most
other races, their animosity toward the Silvanesti and Qualinesti
runs deep. During the War of the Lance, the displaced Silvanesti
invaded the Kagonesti homelands, eventually subjugating them
as slaves. The coming of the Qualinesti initiated further destruc-

 

 

 

 

tion of the Kagonesti’s lands

Kagonesti have cordial relationships with many human vil-
lages. They keep deer and dogs for pets, and eat a variety of
fruits, vegetables, and wild game.

Wild Elf Class Limits

Class Max. Level
Warrior
Fighter Unlim
Ranger Unlim
Paladin N/E *
Solamnic Knight N/E *
Wizard
Mage (Renegade) N/E *
Illusionist (Renegade) N/E *
Wizard of High Sorcery N/ E*
Priest
Cleric (Heathen) N/E *
Druid (Heathen) N/E *
Holy Order of the Stars 7
Rogue
Thief Unlim
Bard N/E*

* N/E means not eligible for that class

Kagonesti have all of the special abilities of elves listed in the 2nd
Edition Player’s Handbook.

Their initial ability rolls are modified by a +1 bonus to
Strength, a +2 bonus to Dexterity, and a -3 penalty to Intelli-
gence. The minimum and maximum ability scores for Dimernesti
are as follows:

Ability Minimum Maximum
Strength 3) 18
Dexterity 8 19
Constitution 8 18
Intelligence 3 12
Wisdom 8 18
Charisma 8 18

 
Elf, Half

 

 

    

     

Tropical subtropical and
temperale/Forests and plams

CLIMATE/TERRAIN

 

FREQUENCY Very rare

ORGANIZATION Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE Any

DIET Ommvore

INTELLIGENCE Vanes (4-18)

TREASURE K, V (« 1/2)

ALIGNMENT Varies, but usually lawful or
neutral good

NO APPEARING 1

ARMOR CLASS 5 (10)

MOVEMENT 9 (12)

HIT DICE +1

THACO 19 (18)

NO OF ATTACKS 1

DAMAGF/ATTACK 1-10 (weapon)

SPECIAL ATTACKS See below

SPECIAL DEFENSES See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE See below

SIZE M (@-6' tall}

MORALE Ehte (13)

XP VALUE Varies

Half-elves are the offspring of human and elven parents

Half-elves strongly resemble ther elven parent, but unhke the
elven races, males have facial haw They are shghtly taller and
somewhat stocker than most elves

Smee most ave raised m an atmosphere of shame, half-elves are
insecure and unsure of themselves In extreme mstances, this mse-
cumty mamfests itself m rebellious or anh-social behavior Others
are trusting of strangers, yet lack the openness necessary to estab-
hsh tue and lastmg fmendsp Many are natural leaders, but few
feel worthy of a leader's responsibility Regardless of ther dispo-
sihon, all halfelves are loners—brooding, quet, and struggling
with self-doubt,

Combat Half-elves are excellent fighters with no obvious tears
If there 1s a flaw m ther fghtng style, 115 ther tendency to per
form hfe-threatenmg acts of bravado A half-elf often challenges
the most formdable opponent m a group of attackers or volun
teers for the most dangerous missions

Halfelves parhcularly excel at melee attacks, magie-usmg half-
elves usually reserve their spells for emergencies or to assist ther
compamons Long swords are ther favomle weapons, but they
also frequently use daggers and long bows They wear a vanety
of armor, preferrmg cham mail when it 1s avanable Unhke other
elven races, half-elves can be skilled horsemen

Habital/Society Because elves and humans are often attracted
to each other, mtermarnage 1s all but mevitable No elven race,
nowever, sanchons such marnages, forcmg elven and human lov-
ers mto discreet relahonshps

Reaction to half-elves from other races vanes The race-
conscious Silvanesh, for mstance, are parbcularly revolted by m-
terracial marnages Qualmesh are more compassionate toward
half-elves, treatmg them coldly but allowmg them a place m ther
sociehes However, halfelves seldom nse to postions of trust or
responsibihty ma Qualmesh commumity Kagonesh respect half-
elves as they would any creature of nature, but they are never ac~
cepted as full members of a be

Humans have a mixed reaction to helf-elves Years ago, half-
elves m human society were considered a great blessmg and
brought honor to a human household, but this atbtude has d+
mmshed considerably with the passage of bme Humans now
view halfelves as a strange and vaguely mfenor race

There 18 no sonety or commumty that consists solely of half-

 

elves Though some halt-elves leam trades or crafts most drift
from place to place

Ecology Halfelves feel kmshmp with no race, although they oc-
casionally find lasing frendshap with humans and Neidar They
prefer simple foods, but have no parhcular preferences

Hal€-Elf Class Limits

Class Max Level
Warrior
Fighter 9
Ranger "
Paladin N/E *
Solamnic Knight 10
Wizard
Mage (Renegade) 7
Blusiomst (Renegade) N/E*
Wizard of High Sorcery 10
Priest
Cleric (Heathen) 5
Druid (Heathen) Unlim
Holy Order of the Stars Unlim
Rogue
Thief Unhm
Bard Unhm

* N/E means not eligible for that class

Half-elves have all of the special abilibes of halfelves hsted m the
2nd Edion Player’s Handbook

Ther mbal abshty rolls are modihed by 2 +2 bonus to Dexter-
aty The mmmmum and maxmum abihty scores for half-elves are
as follows

Ability Minimum Maximum
Strength 3 18
Dexterity 6 18
Constitution 6 8
Intelhgence 4 18
Wisdom 3 18
Charisma 3 18
Elf, Sea— Dargonesti

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical, subtropical, and
temperate/Ocean

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Clan

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Varies (7-18)

TREASURE: F, S in lair

ALIGNMENT: Varies, but usually chaotic or

lawful good

 

NO. APPEARING: 10-40
ARMOR CLASS: 8 (10)
MOVEMENT: 9, SW 15 (or 30 as dolphin)
HIT DICE: 1+1

THACO: 19 (18

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-10 (weapon)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below
SIZE: M (5’ tall)
MORALE: Elite (13)

XP VALUE: Varies

Dargonesti are a race of shy and reclusive sea elves, also known
as Deep Elves

Dargonesti have slender bodies with long, webbed fingers and
toes. They have large violet eyes, dark blue skin, and hair the
color of seaweed They wear diaphanous gowns and adorn them-
selves with jewelry made of sea shells They can breathe both air
and water

Dargonesti avoid all contact with other races, finding them
vulgar and violent. Dargonesti are cordial but wary. Those who
befriend them find Dargonesti to be loyal companions.

Combat: Dargonesti are repulsed by the violence of war and en-
gage in combat only when absolutely necessary.

Dargonesti have the ability to shapechange at will into dolphin
form. They use their dolphin form to investigate potential com-
bat situations and to escape from danger. Dargonesti can shape-
change three times per day, the transformation takes one round.
Though a Dargonesti loses his spellcasting abilities when shape-
changed, he gains the movement rate and special abilities of a dol-
phin (see Mounstrous Compendium one).

Magic-using Dargonesti use spells to confuse or weaken their
opponents before engaging in melee combat. All Dargonesti gain
two Ist-level and one 2nd-level wizard spells when they reach the
10th level, if the Dargonesti is already a wizard, these spells are in
addition to those he already knows. The most commonly re-
ceived spells are color spray, dancing lights, blur, darkness 15’ ra-
dius, and mirror image. The gained spells are innate, not
memorized.

Dargonesti wear leather-like armor which does not impede

their ability to swim. Preferred weapons include daggers, lances,
and tridents.
Habitat/Society: Dargonesti were elven mariners
with a great love of the sea. They eventually became dwellers in
the ocean. Just as the Qualinesti separated from the Silvanesti
over a disagreement about their rigid social system, so did the
Dargonesti break from their cousins, the Dimernesti, to form
their own society. The Dargonesti have cut all ties with the sur-
face world

Dargonesti make their lairs in underwater caves, sunken cities,
and in huge, seashell citadels. Their numbers are few, and most

originally

prefer to live alone with their families instead of in large cities. A
typical group of 20 Dargonesti includes a mix of all available
classes and levels, with about 50% being females and children,
and including at least one 5th-level or higher fighter, and two
2nd- to 4th-level fighters.

Dargonesti clans make decisions by consensus. The leader of
all the clans is called the Speaker of the Moon, but no Dargonesti
has yet risen to claim the position.

Ecology: Dargonesti are on good terms with all sea creatures.

The sole exceptions are sharks and sahuagin, which the
Dargonesti go out of their way to destroy. Dargonesti are cool to-
ward the Dimernesti.

Dargonesti Class Limits

Class Max. Level
Warrior
Fighter 14/Unlim *
Ranger N/E **
Paladin 8/Unlim *
Solamnic Knight N/E **
Wizard
Mage (Renegade) 14/Unlim *
Illusionist (Renegade) N/E *
Wizard of High Sorcery 14/Unlim *
Priest
Cleric (Heathen) N/E **
Druid (Heathen) N/E **
Holy Order of the Stars Unlim
Rogue
Thief N/E**
Bard N/E **

* The level listed before the slash is the maximum allowable to the
character while on land. Dargonesti are unlimited while they are
in the sea Should a Dargonesti of a level higher than that listed
leave the environment of the water, his Hit Dice, hit points, and
all other related characteristics must be temporarily reduced to
the maximum listed.

* * N/E means not eligible for that class.

Dargonesti have all of the special abilities of elves listed in the 2nd
Edition Player’s Handbook.

Their initial ability rolls are modified by a -1 penalty to
Strength and a +2 bonus to Dexterity. The minimum and maxi-
mum ability scores for Dargonesti are as follows:

Ability Minimum Maximum
Strength 3 18
Dexterity 2 19
Constitution 3 18
Intelligence 7 18
Wisdom 7 18
Charisma 7 18
Elf, Sea— Dimernesti

 

GORI CINCE ++ -

“al a

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical, subtropical, and
temperate/ Ocean

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: School

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Varies (8-18)

TREASURE: G, (S)

ALIGNMENT: Varies, but usually chaotic or

neutral good

 

NO. APPEARING: 10-100
ARMOR CLASS: 5 (10)
MOVEMENT: 9, Sw 15 (or 18 as otter)
HIT DICE: 1+1

THACO: 19 (18)

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-10 (weapon)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below
SIZE: M (3 tall)
MORALE: Elite (13)

XP VALUE: Varies

Dimernesti, also known as Shoal Elves, are a proud and secretive
race of sea elves.

Dimernesti have light bluish skin and large eyes that are dark
green or deep blue. They have webbed fingers and toes. They
wear their silver hair long, braided with shells. They prefer skin-
tight clothes in tones of green and blue. They can breathe both air
and water.

Suspicious and wary of strangers, Dimernesti ally themselves
with outsiders only in the most extreme circumstances. They are
intolerant of other races and cultures.

Combat: Dimernesti are aggressive and agile. Though they lack

the Dargonesti’s spellcasting abilities, they share their shape-
changing ability. Dimernesti can shapechange to an otter three
times per day, the transformation taking one round. A shape-
changed Dimernesti retains his hit points, but gains the move-
ment rate and all special abilities of an otter (AC 5; MV 12, Sw 18;
#AT 1; Dmg 1d3). Dimernesti take advantage of the otter’s to pur-
sue down enemies.

Dimernesti attack their opponents in teams; as many as 20 Di-
mernesti may compose a single team. The team attacks or immo-
bilizes the most formidable opponents first. Dimernesti employ
spears, tridents, and short swords. Dimernesti wear a special
lightweight chain mail that does not impede their movement in
water They often ride hippocampi into battle.

Habitat/Society: The Dimernesti were originally elven mariners
who split from the elven land races and became dwellers of the
sea. Prior to the split, the Dimernesti enjoyed a partnership with
the Silvanesti. The Dimernesti adopted a simpler version of the
Silvanesti guild system for their new society.

The Dimernesti leader, called the Speaker of the Sea, is always
a clan elder who is a blood relative of the previous Speaker. While

there are many guilds, there is no caste system and the boundaries
between guilds are not as rigid.

Most Dimernesti live in schools that are clan-oriented groups
There are no families, since all adults in the group care for the
young of the school. At least 5% of a typical group are 4th-level
or higher fighters, and at least 10% are 2nd- to 3rd-level fighters.

Dimernesti arc nomadic. They make their lairs in shallow wa-
ters among kelp beds, reefs, and shipwrecks.

Ecology: The Dimernesti have no formal relationships with
other races. They sometimes trade with surface dwellers. Di-
mernesti occasionally sneak ashore at night to raid nearby settle-
ments for tools and other necessities. They consider Dargonesti to
be weak and primitive.

Dimernesti Class Limits

Class Max. Level
Warrior
Fighter 16/Unlim *
Ranger N/E *
Paladin 10/Unlim *
Solamnic Knight N/E **
Wizard
Mage (Ranegade) N/E**
Illusionist (Renegade, N/E**
Wizard of High Sorcery 10/Unlim *
Priest
Cleric (Heathen) N/E *
Druid (Heathen) N/E *
Holy Order of the Stars Unlim
Rogue
Thief N/E ™
Bard N/E ™*

* The level listed before the slash is the maximum allowable to the
character while on land. Dimernesti are unlimited while they are
in the sea. Should a Dimernesti of a level higher than that listed
leave the environment of the water, his Hit Dice, hit points, and
all other related characteristics must be temporarily reduced to
the maximum listed. He regains his normal abilities when he re-
turns to the water.

** N/E means not eligible for that class.

Dimernesti have all of the special abilities of elves listed in the 2nd
Edition Player’s Handbook.

Their initial ability rolls are modified by a -1 penalty to
Strength and a +2 bonus to Dexterity. The minimum and maxi-
mum ability scores for Dimernesti are as follows:

Ability Minimum Maximum
Strength 3 18
Dexterity 10 19
Constitution 3 18
Intelligence 8 18
Wisdom 8 18
Charisma 8 18
Eyewing

/ ity p 7 spay hm k, "
—Pragonjancos—

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN:
FREQUENCY:
ORGANIZATION:
ACTIVITY CYCLE:
DIET:
INTELLIGENCE:
TREASURE:
ALIGNMENT:

The Abyss (preferred)
Rare

Band

Any

None known

Low (5-7)

Nil

Lawful evil

 

NO. APPEARING:
ARMOR CLASS:
MOVEMENT:

HIT DICE:

THACO:

NO. OF ATTACKS:
DAMAGE/ATTACK:
SPECIAL ATTACKS:
SPECIAL DEFENSES:
MAGIC RESISTANCE:

1-20
4

Fl 24 (B)
3

17

3 orl

1-6/1-6/1-4 or eyewing tears
Tears

See below

Nil

SIZE: L (15’ wingspan)
MORALE: Steady (12)
XP VALUE: 650

Eyewings are loathsome inhabitants of the Abyss. They are obe-
dient, loyal, and dumb—perfect servitors for the dark gods and
their more powerful minions.

An eyewing’s body is a fat, egg-shaped ball covered with mat-
ted black fur. The five-foot-wide body is supported by a pair of
five-foot-long leathery bat wings. Each wing is tipped with a set
of three razor-sharp talons. An eight-foot-long rat’s tail dangles
from the back of the body. The tail ends in a small, sharp spur. It
has no feet and has never been known to land.

The body is dominated by the single, bulging, four-foot-wide
eyeball. The eyeball is black with a blood-red pupil. A vile blue
fluid continuously leaks from the eye, soiling its fur. Great leath-
ery eyelids squeeze this fluid out and away from the creature. The
stench is unbelievable. It gives off an acidic smell that scorches
the sensitive tissues in other creatures’ noses and mouths.

Combat: An eyewing has two main forms of attack. The most
common form is to use its claws and tail to strike its opponents. It
can either swoop down on them, or hover and slash. Its second
form of attack is to bomb its enemies with a large eyewing tear
that is squeezed out of the large eyeball by the leathery eyelid. It
has amazing control over the release of the tear—it has the same
chance to hit with a tear as with its melee attacks. It releases a tear
when it is within 100 feet of its target. It can deliver this attack
while hovering or diving.

An eyewing tear is a one-foot-diameter ball of poisonous blue
fluid. The attack roll determines if the target dodged the tear. If
the tear hits, the victim must roll a successful saving throw vs.
poison or suffer 2d6 points of damage (success means only 1d6
points of damage). The tears may also splash onto anyone within
ten feet of the target. The attack roll for the splash attack is made
with a -2 penalty. If someone is splashed, a saving throw vs. poi-
son must be rolled, those who fail suffer 2d4 points of damage,
while those who succeed suffer 1d4 points of damage.

A tear hardens into a rubbery lump within 2d6 hours after be-
ing shed. The exact time depends upon the humidity, tempera-
ture, etc. Anybody handling a hardened tear must roll a
successful saving throw vs. poison or suffer 1 point of damage.

Eyewings have extremely acute vision that enables them to see
with perfect accuracy for up to 25 miles They also have infra-

 

 

 

 

ls oa a ee ene Ee “al

vision out to 120 feet. They are immune to all cold-based attack
forms, as are their tears.

Habitat/Society: Eyewings are supernatural creatures that exist
only to serve their dark masters. When left without orders they
become sluggish and listless. This should not be taken to mean
that they are any less dangerous. This listlessness is their expres-
sion of boredom, but nothing relieves eyewing boredom quite
like tearing apart innocent creatures.

Eyewings have no society as such. They do not have a culture.
Their simple language consists of shrill squeaks. They understand
other spoken languages, but cannot speak them. When in the
Abyss they are found only on layers that allow for flying. Their
immunity to cold makes them at home on any of the icy layers as
well.

Ecology: Eyewings are sexless creatures that are not a part of
nature. They kill even when they’re not ordered to, just for the
pleasure of it. Eyewings have been encountered on the moon,
where there is no air to breathe and no water to drink. It is as-
sumed that they do not need air or water. They have never been
seen to eat: it is assumed by most who have studied them that
they are sustained by magic. The more powerful creatures of the
Abyss have no qualms about an eyewing snack should one be
nearby, but they are not the natural prey of any creature.
Fetch

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN:

FREQUENCY:
ORGANIZATION:
ACTIVITY CYCLE:
DIET:
INTELLIGENCE:
TREASURE:
ALIGNMENT:

Any

Very rare
Solitary

Any

Special

High (13-14)
Nil

Chaotic evil

 

NO. APPEARING:
ARMOR CLASS:
MOVEMENT:

HIT DICE:

THACO0:

NO. OF ATTACKS:
DAMAGE/ATTACK:
SPECIAL ATTACKS:
SPECIAL DEFENSES:

MAGIC RESISTANCE:

SIZE:
MORALE:
XP VALUE:

oO Aw

11

2

Special

Drains 2 levels per hit
Invisible except to
Nil

M (4-7’ tall)

Very steady (14)

3,000

Fetch are harbingers of death. Existing on the fringes of the
Abyss, these creatures can only reach into the Prime Material
plane through reflective surfaces, such as mirrors or pools of wa-
ter.

A fetch appears to be a haggard and deathly pale imitation of
the person or creature gazing into the reflective surface. If more
than one person or creature gazes into the reflective surface at the
same time, the fetch assumes the image of the person or creature
closest to the reflective surface; if all are equally distant, it
chooses randomly. The fetch never assumes the image of a person
or creature taller than seven feet or shorter than four feet.

The fetch’s eyes are dull and lifeless. It reflexively breaks into
an evil grin when its eyes meet those of its intended victim for the
first time. Its flesh is ice cold to the touch. Fetch neither breathe
nor speak, although they do engage in limited telepathic com-
munication with evil clerics of 10th level or higher.

Combat: Though fetch can gaze into the Prime Material plane
through reflective surfaces, they cannot emerge into this plane
until they meet the eyes of their victims. Fetch can appear in any
type of reflective surface, including a mirror, the surface of a
pond, or even a shiny silver tray. However, the surface must be
large enough for the fetch’s body to fit through. (For instance, as-
sume that a fetch is gazing through a one-foot-diameter mirror
hanging on the wall of a room at an inn. An overweight warrior
enters the room The fetch assumes the warrior’s image, but the
fetch is now too plump to squeeze through the mirror, and the In-
tended victim is sate.)

A fetch is invisible to all but the intended victim, even when at-
tacking. True seeing (but not detect invisibility) spells reveal the
creature The intended victim can always see the fetch in the re-
flective surface. The victim suffers penalties of -2 to his attack roll
and +2 to his AC. The victim’s companions suffer a -4 penalty to
their attack rolls and a +2 penalty to their ACs, when attacking
the fetch.

A fetch attacks with an exact replica of the weapon of its in-
tended victim; if the victim has more than one weapon, the fetch
chooses one of them randomly If the victim has no weapon, the
fetch attacks with its hands The fetch makes two attacks per
round Each successful attack causes the victim to lose two levels

 

 

 

 

 

of experience—roll the Hit Dice appropriate to the victim’s class
two times and subtract that number of hit points from the charac-
ter’s total, also subtracting the victims Constitution bonus for
those levels. If a lost level is one in which the character received a
fixed number of hit points instead of a die roll, subtract the appro-
priate number of hit points These hit points are permanently
lost; the adjusted hit point total is now the victim’s maximum. All
powers, spells, and abilities associated with the lost levels are also
lost.

If a victim is reduced to level 0, the fetch pulls him through the
reflective surface and into the Abyss Once into the Abyss, the
victim turns into a fetch. If the victim is reduced to level 0, but the
fetch is killed or is otherwise prevented from taking victim into
the Abyss, the victim, assuming he is still alive, becomes an ordi-
nary person—his adventuring days are over. He can continue his
career if a wish or restoration spell is cast on his behalf. If a level 0
character suffers another successful hit from the fetch, he is slam
instantly, regardless of whether he has any hit points remaining.
Unlike victims of other energy-draining creatures, a level 0 char-
acter slam by a fetch does not return as an undead.

A fetch can pull victims into the Abyss only through the reflec-
tive surface from which it originally appeared. If that reflective
surface is destroyed, such as by shattering the mirror or draining
the pond, the fetch must locate another reflective surface to re-
turn itself to the Abyss If it does not locate a new reflective sur-
face within 24 hours, it begins to lose hit points at the rate of 3d6
per day. If it is reduced to 0 hit points or fewer, it is destroyed.

Habitat Society: Motivated by an obsessive hatred of all intelli-
gent races of good or neutral alignment, fetch spend most of their
time in the Abyss searching for portals leading to reflective sur-
faces in the Prime Material plane. Less than 1% of the discovered
portals lead to an accessible reflective surface. New fetch are cre-
ated only from victims pulled into the Abyss.

Ecology: Fetch neither eat nor drink. They occasionally engage
in recreational killings of weaker creatures encountered in the
Abyss. Fetch are sometimes used as assassins and aides by the
gods of evil and by evil wizards.
Fire Minion

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Volcanic, lava
FREQUENCY: Very Rare
ORGANIZATION: Hierarchial

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Special

INTELLIGENCE: Average to genius (11-18)
TREASURE: None

ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil

 

NO. APPEARING: 1-4
ARMOR CLASS: 3
MOVEMENT: 12
HIT DICE: 6
THACO: 15
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2d6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Fire
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Immunity to fire
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil
SIZE: L (7’-9’)
MORALE: 15

XP VALUE: 975

Fire minions are fearsome creatures, apparently from the elemen-
tal plane of Fire. Their bodies are composed of living flame, and
although they can assume any form they wish, the most common
is that of a large humanoid, complete with fangs and homs. Their
bodies are the colors of flame and constantly swirl and flicker
with the living light.

Combat: Fire minions are powerful warriors, fortunately (for
their enemies) limited by their environment from spreading and
conquering. They attack by rising up out of fire, assuming their
form in the process. Since this takes one round, it normally pro-
vides sufficient warning to the victim and only allows the normal
chance of surprise. However, a fire minion can also return back
into the flame (in one round), move to another location and reap-
pear during the next round. While this does not provide any spe-
cific combat bonus, it can be unnerving to inexperienced
opponents.

Fire minions normally wield large swords. Whatever the
weapon used, the creature causes 2d6 points of damage. In addi-
tion, the creature has a constant flame aura that causes 1d6 points
of damage to all within five feet unless protected from fire in some
way. No attack roll is needed to hit and no saving throw is al-
lowed to avoid this aura damage.

Because they are made from living flame, fire minions are com-
pletely immune to fire-based attacks. Indeed, magical flames
(fireballs and dragon fire) restore hit points equal to the damage
the attack would normally cause. Although they would seem to
be highly vulnerable to water-based attacks, their intense heat
protects them somewhat. They suffer 1 extra point of damage per
die from water-based attacks. They are extremely vulnerable to
cold-based attacks and suffer double the normal damage from

 

 

 

these (although saving throws still apply). In addition, any water-
or cold-based attack halves the length the time the fire minion can
stay out of its fiery home.

Habitat Society: Little is known of the fire minions’ lives, simply
because their natural environment precludes most observation by
outsiders. It is certain they come from the elemental plane of Fire,
and are considered free-willed fire elementals. Their life habits
there are unknown.

Fire minions have a limited ability to gate themselves to the
Prime Material plane. Such gating can be accomplished only in
areas of intense flame-most commonly the cauldrons of volca-
noes. Normal fires are not sufficient to allow gating and so fire
minions tend to appear only in exotic locales.

Fire, flame, and lava are the natural homes of fire minions, and
they dwell within them with no ill effects. They can travel
through these materials as easily as walking. However, they have
only a limited ability to leave the flames and risk injury or death
when they do so. A fire minion will not feel the effects for 1d6
hours. After this time they lose their flame aura ability. In another
1d6 hours, the minion begins to take damage at the rate of 1-2
points per turn. This continues until either the minion returns to
the flame (to rest and heal) or dies. Note that magical fires can
heal the damage but cannot prolong the ability to move about on
land.

Ecology: It is hard to know just where the fire minions fit into
things, since so little is known of their lives in the plane of Fire. It
is believed they eat lava or fire, although this is not confirmed.
When slam, their bodies evaporate in a burst of ash, leaving very
little to examine or study.
Fireshadow

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN:
FREQUENCY:
ORGANIZATION:
ACTIVITY CYCLE:
DIET:
INTELLIGENCE:
TREASURE:
ALIGNMENT:

Any

Very rare
Solitary

Any

Special
Genius (17-18)
Nil

Chaotic evil

 

NO. APPEARING:
ARMOR CLASS:
MOVEMENT:

HIT DICE:

THACO0:

NO. OF ATTACKS:
DAMAGE/ATTACK:
SPECIAL ATTACKS:
SPECIAL DEFENSES:
MAGIC RESISTANCE:
SIZE:

1-6/1-6/3-18 or 2-40

See below

Hit only by magical weapons
50%

G (30’tall)

MORALE:
XP VALUE:

Champion (16)
11,000

The fireshadow is a creature from the Abyss that can be sum-
moned to the Prime Material plane by an 8th-level or higher evil
cleric, but only if the cleric’s deity approves and aids the summon-
ing.

The fireshadow is made of cold, green flame. It can assume
whatever shape the summoner specifies, but it must appear at its
full height of 30 feet. It might appear as a wraith-like dragon, a
towering human, or an immense skeleton. Regardless of its form,
the fireshadow is always surrounded by an aura of pale, green
fire. Though it cannot speak, the fireshadow communicates tele-
pathically with its summoner.

Fireshadows relish death and destruction and are willing part-
ners in campaigns of evil. They are particularly useful as assassins
and guardians.

Combat: A fireshadow can make three melee strikes per round.
Opponents who are not resistant to fire also suffer 1d6 points of
damage each round if within ten feet of the fireshadow’s aura of
green fire.

A victim who comes in contact with a fireshadow must roll a
successful saving throw vs. spell, or his flesh begins to turn to
green fire. A contacted victim’s flesh tums to flame at the rate of
1d8 points per round. The spread of the flame can be stopped by a
cure spell, which works normally, or by a dose of holy water,
which cures 1d6 + 1 points of damage per round. Unless all of the
flame is eliminated, however, it continues to inflict 1d8 points per
round.

Nothing short of a wish spell can restore a victim to normal
once he has been completely converted to green fire. If a victim is
completely converted, the fireshadow can control the victim as a
smaller fireshadow with the same HD as the victim had before
death; the victim no longer has a will of his own and must obey all
telepathic orders of the fireshadow. The fireshadow can also ab-
sorb a converted victim. Absorbed victims restore 1d20 points of
damage to the fireshadow.

The fireshadow has a special attack form called the ray of ob-
livion, This is an invisible cone of energy five feet wide and 130
feet long, flashed from the fireshadow’s mouth. Once per turn,
the fireshadow can use its ray of oblivion to inflict 4d4 points of
damage every other round upon all opponents within its area of

 

 

 

 

 

 

effect. A successful saving throw vs. breath weapon reduces this
damage by half. An opponent reduced to 0 or fewer hit points by
the ray of oblivion is instantly disintegrated.

The fireshadow is immune to fire-based and mental attacks, as
well as attacks from all nonmagical melee weapons. Magical
weapons inflict normal damage. It cannot be turned by a priest,
but a blow from a mace of disruption has a 50% chance of utterly
destroying it. If not destroyed outright, the fireshadow suffers
double damage with each successful strike from a mace of disrup-
tion, plus twice any applicable damage bonuses.

The fireshadow can also be destroyed by; a successful hit from
the hammer of Kharas, a mighty artifact that, according to leg-
end, is the only hammer that can forge a dragonlance. The ham-
mer of Kharas is twice the size of a normal war hammer and gives
its wielder a +2 bonus to his attack rolls. It inflicts 2d4 +2 points
of damage on a normal hit and cannot be lifted by a character
with a Strength of less than 12; anyone with a Strength of less
than 18/50 suffers a -2 penalty to his attack roll, effectively can-
celling out the + 2 bonus. It acts as a mace of disruption against
undead and creatures from the Abyss, turning undead as a 12th-
level priest. It is intelligent (Int 11 and Ego 11) and controls any-
one who touches it, if the character’s Intelligence and Wisdom
scores total 21 or less.

The hammer of Kharas has the following special abilities at the
20th level of magic use, activated at the hammer’s discretion: de-
fects evil as a paladin; gives wielder immunity to fear, both nor-
mal and magical; wielder unaffected by 1st-4th level spells; casts
prayer once per day; acts as a potion of fire giant strength once
per day; casts cure serious wounds once per day; inspires magical
awe in all dwarves, stunning them into inaction until the wielder
disappears from sight.

Habitat Society: Fireshadows have no permanent lairs, freely
roaming the skies of the Abyss looking for victims until sum-
moned to the Prime Material plane Every 200 years, a firesha-
dow splits in half to form an identical copy. When a fireshadow
reaches the age of 500, it turns to ash.

Ecology: Fireshadows can consume any creature by turning it
to flame. though they prefer intelligent victims.
Gnome, Tinker (Minoi)

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical, subtropical, and
temperate/Subterranean

FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Colony

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Varies (8-18)

TREASURE: M (x 3); (C, Q (x 20))

ALIGNMENT: Neutral or lawful good

NO. APPEARING: 40-400

ARMOR CLASS: 5 (10)

MOVEMENT: 6

HIT DICE: 1

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6 (weapon)

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below

SIZE: S (3’ tall)

MORALE: Average (8)

XP VALUE: Varies

Tinker gnomes re constantly designing, building, and testing de--
vices for a variety of applications, but their innate incompetence
is such that anything their technology can do, magic can usually
do more quickly and efficiently.

Tinker gnomes average three feet tall and weigh 45-50 pounds.
Females are as large as males. Though short and stocky, tinker
gnomes move gracefully, and their hands are deft and sure. They
have rich brown skin, curly or straight white hair, china-blue or
violet eyes, and straight, cavity-free teeth. Males have soft, curly
white beards and moustaches. Both sexes have rounded ears and
large noses; they develop facial wrinkles after age 50.

The voice of a tinker gnome resembles that of a human, except
the timbre is more nasal. Tinker gnomes speak intensely and rap-
idly, running their words together in unending sentences. They
are capable of listening carefully and speaking at the same time.
When two gnomes meet, they babble away, answering questions
asked by the other as part of the same continuous sentence.
Gnomes have learned to speak slowly and distinctly to other
races. If frightened or depressed, a gnome may speak in much
shorter sentences than usual.

Tinker gnomes are second only to gully dwarves and goblins as
the worst dressers on Ansalon. They wear almost anything that is
relatively clean. They especially enjoy scarves, shawls, and hard
leather footwear. In their research areas, they wear easily cleaned
smocks and coats.

Combat: Unless they are adventurers, gnomes rarely carry
weapons, although some of their tools can be used as weapons.
Strange weapons of dubious utility are always being invented.
Some, like the three-barrel water blaster, are all but useless, while
others, like the multiple spear flinger, show promise.

Hand-held and light crossbows, slings, short bows, darts, and
melee weapons that can be hurled, such as hammers and hand
axes, are the gnomes’ preferred weapons. Squads of gnomes
sometimes operate elaborate catapult-type devices to fire boul-
ders, water bags, or garbage at their enemies. Gnomes wear all
types of armor, but typically outfit themselves in a variety of mis-
matched pieces giving them an effective AC of 5.

Habitat/Society: Tinker gnomes establish colonies consisting of
immense tunnel complexes in secluded mountain ranges. The
largest gnome settlement in Ansalon is beneath Mount Never-
mind. Other gnome colonies are scattered throughout Krynn in

 

 

 

 

mountainous or rough, hilly regions, but their populations sel-
dom exceed 200-400.

Mount Nevermind is a scene of nonstop activity and noise.
Gnomes scurry from place to place while steam blasts, whistles
shriek, gears grind, and lights flash. Hundreds of staircases,
ramps, pulley elevators, and ladders cross from level to level.
Catapults called gnomeflingers serve as rapid transport, as do
steam-powered cars mounted on rails. Beneath the city is a com-
plex network of tunnels and mines that spreads in all directions.
This ancient tunnel system, also known as the Undercity, con-
tams the lairs of dangerous monsters and pockets of hostile sub-
terranean races. The gnomes use some of the tunnels as dump
sites for hazardous wastes.

All tinker gnomes belong to a guild. There are perhaps 50 ma-
jor guilds and a host of minor ones. Hydraulics, Chemistry, Ar-
chitecture, Hydrodynamics, Kinetics, Mathematics, Weapons,
Mechanical Engineering, and Education are among the more pop-
ular guilds. Only the Agricultural and Medical Guilds are con-
cerned with life sciences. Scientific guilds without immediate
application, such as Astronomy, are usually small and have little
influence. Clerical gnomes originally belonged to the Priests
Guild, which was the first and only guild to become extinct. Their
functions were eventually absorbed by the Medical and Philoso-
phers Guilds.

All gnomes have a Lifequest: to attain perfect understanding of
a single device. Since few have attained this goal, the tinker
gnomes are perpetually unfulfilled.

The gnomes are governed by an elected Grand Council of clan
leaders and guild masters The council members serve for life.
Methods of election vary from guild to guild and from clan to
clan. The government is so heavily laden with bureaucracy that
few major decisions are actually rendered by the Grand Council.
Most decisions are made by guilds and clans who have their own
agendas, regardless of the wishes of the rest of the community.
Everyone insists on strict adherence to regulations, but this proc-
ess is so time-consuming that even gnomes lack the necessary pa-
tience.

A gnome has three different names. One is the gnome’s true
name, which is actually an extensive history of the gnome’s entire
family tree. Though gnomes can easily remember at least the first
Gnome, Tinker (Minoi)

 

 

few thousand letters of their true names, they use a shorter name
for routine communication. This name is a simple listing of the
highlights of the gnome's ancestry, requiring only half a minute or
so to recite. Humans and other races who deal with gnomes have
developed even shorter names for them, consisting of the first one
or two syllables of their true names. Gnomes consider these ab-
breviated names undignified, but have learned to live with them.

Common to any gnomish colony are the sages who record
endless volumes of information, guesses, facts, figures, specula-
tions and philosophical doodles detailing their guild committees’
various concerns. These records are seldom meaningful to any-
one except the authors.

Reorx is the only deity recognized by the tinker gnomes.
Though they have no formal religious services, the gnomes have
a healthy respect for their god. Reorx is thought of as an unusu-
ally large gnome who epitomizes the gnomish love of creating
and tinkering, as evidenced by such inventions as the sun and the
moons.

Though most gnomes are content to stay home and tinker with
their projects, there are some who can be as adventurous as mem-
bers of any other race. Adventuring gnomes are generally unable
to learn from previous experience and repeat the same mistakes,
yet they are often successful in developing quirky solutions to
save the day for their companions. Adventurer gnomes are gen-
eral handymen and _ jacks-of-all-trades; anything and everything
draws their attention, causing them to reach for their notebooks
or tool belts.

But the vast majority of gnomes are devoted to creating new
devices. Gnomish inventions are almost exclusively driven by ba-
sic mechanical devices, such as gears, windmills, waterwheels,
pulleys, and screws, in unnecessarily complicated arrangements.
Their sheer love of technology is their downfall, for they improve
their inventions to death. Simple solutions are rejected in favor of
redundant and ultimately unworkable complications. Needless to
say, gnomish technology has had little impact on the cultures of
Ansalon.

Ecology: In general, tinker gnomes are not well-liked by other
races. Their technological bent makes them quite alien to those
accustomed to magic, and their poor understanding of social rela-
tions puts off most potential friends. The Agricultural Guild
looks after the gnomes’ nutritional needs, maintaining fungi-
growth farms and herds of cave-dwelling sheep. Research into the
creation of artificial foods continues, but so far has produced
nothing edible.

Mad Gnomes

Mad gnomes look like normal tinker gnomes and have similar
abilities, but they have no talent for technology. They are almost
always from lands far away from Ansalon. The few mad gnomes
who have learned technological skills never do their work prop-
erly as far as normal gnomes are concerned--their devices work
too well.

All off-world gnomes are considered to be mad gnomes. Krynn
gnomes get a yearly dice roll to see if they become mad gnomes. If
a 100 is rolled on 1d100, 1d100 is rolled again. If a 100 result oc-
curs again, the gnome becomes a mad gnome. Mad gnomes from
Krynn start out with the gnomish technological skills. Off-world
mad gnomes have a 1% chance of learning gnomish technological
skills during any six-month period spent with normal gnomes; the
roll is not cumulative and can be checked only once every six
months. Unlike normal tinker gnomes, mad gnomes with techno-
logical skills create devices that are elegant and efficient.

Mad gnomes who can use technology get a +3 bonus to any
success roll involved in creating a device. Also, the device is auto-
matically 1d6 sizes smaller than a regular gnomish device of this
type.

Tinker Gnome Abilities
Tinker gnomes have all of the special abilities of gnomes listed in
the 2nd Edition Players Handbook.

Their initial ability rolls are modified by a -1 penalty to
Strength and a +2 bonus to Dexterity. The minimum and maxi-
mum ability scores for tinker gnomes are as follows:

Ability Minimum Maximum
Strength 6 18
Dexterity 8 18
Constitution 8 18
Intelligence 8 18
Wisdom 3 12
Charisma 3 18

Gnomes in Krynn can only be of the tinker class. Initially, they
have one weapon proficiency and five nonweapon proficiencies.
They gain one weapon and three nonweapon proficiencies for
every two additional levels.

Gnome Advancement Table

Level XP HD (d4s) Title

1 1,250 2 Aide 5th

2 2,500 3 Aide 4th

3 5,000 4 Aide 3rd

4 10,000 5 Aide 2nd

5 20,000 6 Aide ist

6 40,000 7 Mate 2nd

7 60,000 8 Mate ist

8 100,000 9 Tinker

9 140,000 10 Master Tinker
10 270,000 10+2 Craftsgnome
11 450,000 10+4 Craft Master
12 600,000 10+6 Head Tinker
13 800,000 10+8

14 1,000,000 10+10

15 1,500,000 10+12 Master Craftsgnome*
16 2,500,000 10+14

17 4,000,000 10+16

18 10,000,000 10+18

* There can be only one Master Craftsgnome in any colony at a
given time. If a colony already has a Master Craftsgnome,
gnomes acquiring the experience points to become 15th level do
not gain this title.
Gurik Cha’ahl

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate forest
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night
DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Semi- (2-4)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1-2
ARMOR CLASS: 8
MOVEMENT: 6

HIT DICE: 2

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Surprise, camouflage
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: S (3-4)
MORALE: 9

XP VALUE: 65

The gurik cha’ahl (“ ghost people”) are the dangerous and unpleas-
ant offspring of the IIquar goblins of Taladas. They are the ill-
favored who, driven out of the villages, have managed to survive
in the forests against the odds. They look much like normal gob-
lins, except for some abnormality that marks them.

Combat: The ghost people are not brave warriors and are never
likely to be. Their survival has been due to their stealth, cunning,
and deceitfulness, not their fierce combat prowess.

Gurik cha’ahl are quite stealthy. They move silently 70% of the
time and have a natural ability to use camouflage and natural ter-
ram. There is only a 25% chance they are spotted by casual obser-
vation This chance improves by 30% for close scrutiny and an
additional 30% if the gurik cha’ahl is moving. (Thus there is a
85% chance of spotting a moving gunk cha’ahl if the character
watches carefully.) While the ability to move silently applies to
any type of terrain, the camouflage ability requires the presence
of some concealing terrain, although it can be quite slight.

A gurik cha’ahl that moves silently imposes a -4 penalty to the
party’s surprise rolls. One that fails to move silently but is still un-
spotted causes a -2 penalty to character surprise rolls.

Once in combat, a gurik cha’ ahi will try to cause as much harm
as possible, or steal something useful and escape as quickly as it
can. The creatures have no desire to fight it out or battle superior
odds. Thus most attacks by the gurik are against lone stragglers

 

 

 

 

 

or solitary hunters. On rare occasions several gurik will operate
together as a group.

Habitat/Society: The gurik cha’ahl are solitary dwellers. Rejects
of the goblin tribes who live in the Ilquar Mountains, the gurik
cha’ahl have managed to survive alone in the wilderness against
the odds. Some have dim memories of their childhood, but most
were abandoned at too young an age to remember. Nonetheless,
the similarity in appearance between themselves and the goblins
has not escaped their notice. They have developed an intense ha-
tred of the goblins and delight in causing them harm.

The gurik cha’ahl are loners, without friends or communities.
Because of their natures, they do not even trust each other- and
classify other gurik with the goblins in general. The few times
they do cooperate are when they are faced with a large incursion
of goblins. Although they are spiteful and violent, their rage is di-
rected mostly at the goblins. They attack other creatures for food
and little else.

Ecology: The gurik cha’ahl act as predators and scavengers in
their territory. Beyond this, their role in the local culture is strictly
as a tool for mothers to scare children, a bogeyman to frighten
them into being good or going to sleep.
Hatori

 

 

Lesser Greater
CLIMATE/
TERRAIN: Deserts Deserts
FREQUENCY: Rare Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary /Small Solitary
herds
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any
DIET: Carnivore Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7) Low (5-7)
TREASURE: U U (x 2)
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral Chaotic neutral

 

NO. APPEARING: 1 or 2-5 1

ARMOR CLASS: 2 1

MOVEMENT: 15 12

HIT DICE: 1-5 6-20

THACO: Varies Varies

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2 2

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 3-18/1-12 3-36/2-24

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Swallow whole Swallow whole

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil Nil

SIZE: L to G (10’ to 50’ G (60’ to 200’
long) long)

MORALE: Average (9) Steady (11)

XP VALUE: Variable Variable

Hatori, sometimes called the “crocodiles of the sands” are giant
reptiles dwelling within sandy desert wastes. The hatori’s hard,
knobby hide ranges in color from gray-white to red-brown and is
virtually indistinguishable from stone. Hatori use this semblance
to great advantage, allowing the wind to partially bury them be-
neath the sands so that a casual observer may believe he is look-
ing at rock outcroppings instead of behemoths of the sands.

Hatori are shaped like overgrown lizards, save that their legs
have evolved into flat, flipper-like appendages that they use in
conjunction with their massive tails to “swim” through the sands
with astonishing speed and mobility. When forced to travel upon
something more solid, such as a rocky plain, hatori move by
awkwardly flopping and dragging themselves forward. Hatori
eyes are normally concealed deep within dark recesses that look
like small hollows. In the case of greater hatori (6 HD and over)
these recesses sometimes look like cavern entrances.

Greater hatori are identical to lesser hatori in all respects save
size and their ability to swallow larger prey whole (see below).

Combat: The only thing that can drive hatori into combat is

hunger. Unfortunately, hatori have voracious appetites and food
is rare in their home environment, so they never pass up an op-
portunity to make a meal out of a passing traveler-or even an
entire caravan. The hatori’s favorite hunting method is to posi-
tion themselves along a well-used migratory trail or caravan
route. When, believing the hatori to be no more than a rocky out-
cropping, a prospective meal passes nearby, the hatori spring into
action.

Once the battle begins, hatori try to bite their victims with their
toothy maws. Greater hatori swallow man-sized victims whole
on a natural attack roll of 20. Such victims suffer 1d12 points of
damage per round from the crushing and acid effects of the diges-
tive tract. Swallowed victims cannot escape until the hatori is
killed, for the muscular action of the esophagus prevents them
from climbing out the throat.

Hatori use their bony tails to lash out at anyone attacking from
the rear, or to attack fleeing victims while simultaneously trying
to eat someone else.

 

 

 

 

 

Lesser hatori can swallow whole only opponents of kender size
or less (on a natural attack roll of 20). Experience points earned
for defeating a hatori depend upon its number of HD. See Tables
31 and 32 on page 47 of the 2nd Edition Dungeon Master’s Guide
to compute these XP values.

Habitat/Society: Hatori have in the sandy regions of large des-
erts. Because they are constantly se -ching for food, however,
they tend to be found near migratory paths or along busy caravan
routes. They stay in a productive area until food becomes scarce.

Hatori grow very slowly, at the rate of only one foot per year,
but they keep growing throughout their lives. They accumulate
Hit Dice at the rate of 1 HD every ten years. Therefore, young ha-
tori of 1 HD are usually ten feet or less in length and ten years old
or younger, hatori of 2 HD are between ten and 20 feet and be-
tween ten and 20 years of age, etc.

Females care for their hatchlings until the young reach 50 feet in
length (5 HD). This is the only time when they are commonly en-
countered in groups, for adult hatori are solitary creatures. Fe-
male hatori accompanied by hatchlings seldom exceed 10 HD, for
they generally stop bearing young after their 100th year.

Every ten years, male hatori and young females without any
offspring migrate to the center of the desert. Here the males en-
gage in ferocious battles to win the right to breed with the fe-
males. Although no civilized man has ever witnessed these
mating rituals, certain desert tribes speak of a “time of thunder
when mountains die.” These legends may refer to battles occur-
ring during the hatori mating season

Ecology: Hatori eat anything, though they cannot digest gems
or magical armor and weaponry. These items tend to accumulate
in their stomachs over their long lifetimes. Hatori have no natural
predators (save for each other at mating time), though it is ru-
mored that certain kinds of dragons have been known to attack
smaller hatori in times of hunger. Legends speak of a hidden ha-
tori burial ground where ancient hatori go to die. If such a burial
ground exists, it certainly abounds with gems and magical armor.
Haunt, Knight

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN:
FREQUENCY:
ORGANIZATION:
ACTIVITY CYCLE:
DIET:
INTELLIGENCE:
TREASURE:
ALIGNMENT:

Any / Battlefield

Very rare

Military

During Solinari full moon
Nil

Low (5-7)

See below

Lawful good

 

NO. APPEARING:
ARMOR CLASS:
MOVEMENT:

HIT DICE:

THACO:

NO. OF ATTACKS:
DAMAGE/ATTACK:
SPECIAL ATTACKS:
SPECIAL DEFENSES:
MAGIC RESISTANCE:

1-8

2 or better

9

8

13

2

1-8/1-8

Horror

Cannot be turned by LG clerics
10%

SIZE: M (6’ tall)
MORALE: 16
XP VALUE: 2,000

A knight haunt is a floating suit of Solamnic armor, always ac-
companied by some sort of weapon. If the battle where the knight
fell was one where more than 100 Solamnic knights died then it is
always riding a suit of floating horse barding.

The armor is always mirror bright and its weapon is always in
perfect condition. A faint golden haze can be seen, creating the
form of the Knight who used to own the armor.

Combat: A knight haunt still has the inner fighting spirit of its
former human form. It judges any conflict it encounters accord-
ing to its Solamnic traditions and fights or withdraws exactly as a
Knight would. It can sense the alignment of its enemies and al-
ways attacks evil and chaos before any other opponent. The crea-
ture never attacks Knights of Solamnia, but it defends itself and
withdraws in an orderly manner when facing these opponents.

Knight haunts are immune to sleep, charm, hold, paralyzation,
and mental control spells of any type, as well as cold-based at-
tacks.

Breath Weapons/Special Abilities: A knight haunt can feel the
power of magic in a 50-foot area. This enables it to find magical
weapons from a battlefield and use these weapons for its own de-
fense. This also enables it to attack the most magical enemy in a
group if there is a decision as to which of two evil foes to attack.

All PCs and NPCs who encounter a knight haunt must roll a
horror check upon first sighting it. The character rolls 1d20. If the
roll is less than or equal to the combined total of character’s Wis-
dom and experience level, the check succeeds and nothing hap-
pens. If the check fails, the character is horror struck and suffers a
-4 penalty to all dice rolls for the duration of the battle with the
knight haunt. These checks are also rolled for all characters every
time the knight haunt kills a character.

The only way to end the menace is to kill the haunt and pour
holy water on the armor afterward. If holy water is not used, the
haunt reforms again, completely restored, at Solinari’s next full
moon phase.

Habitat/Society: A knight haunt is sometimes (5% chance) cre-
ated when an especialiy lawful good Knight with a Wisdom of 17
or higher dies in battle. The haunt rises with the next full moon

 

 

 

 

 

 

phase of Solinari. If its armor has been taken away, the power of
the spirit can magically teleport the armor back to the site of the
battlefield. If its armor has been destroyed, the power that creates
the haunt can create an exact duplicate of the armor it wore.

When more than one knight haunt roams a battlefield, they)
join into military groups and defend each other.

Ecology: The knight haunt rises with Solinari’s full moon phase
and roams for several miles around the battlefield. It is looking
for a chance to do battle and will tight any intelligent creature it
comes across.

The knight haunt does not battle defenseless beings, those with
no weapons, or those trying to defend their homes. The undead
spirit does not like to fight females and avoids such combat it
there are others in the area to fight.

Young Knights of Solamnia often go hunting knight haunts. Al-
though it is seldom talked about, it is considered very lucky to put
a knight haunt spirit to rest and then use the haunt’s armor.
Horax

— Pay: SN] UNICE: Cae

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Subterranean
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Colony
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Animal (1)
TREASURE: Nil (D)
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 3d10
ARMOR CLASS: 3
MOVEMENT: 15

HIT DICE: 4

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2d8

SPECIAL ATTACKS:
SPECIAL DEFENSES:

-1 initiative, crush
Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil
SIZE: M (5’-6’ long)
MORALE: 10
XP VALUE: 270
Young 15

The horax are insectoid creatures, as ferocious as they are mind-
less. They are long with 12 legs, small but powerful mandibles,
and tough chitinous plates that cover the back. Horax are long
and low to the ground. Their legs end in strong grippers, able to
hold firmly to nearly any surface. They are very dark in color,
blue-black to pure black and are not easily seen, even by those
with infravision.

Combat: The horax almost always attack in packs. They rely on
numbers and speed to make their kills. Although they appear
short and stocky, they are surprisingly quick, making them diffi-
cult to fight. They gain a +1 bonus to their chances of being sur-
prised and a -1 bonus to all initiative die roils.

The horax have exceptional climbing ability and can cling and
attack from almost any surface and any angle. It is not unusual to
find horax packs scouring underground tunnels, some moving
along the floor while others cling to the ceilings and walls. This
can make them dangerous and difficult to fight for the unwary.

Horax attack with their mandibles. Though these are small,
they are strong enough to crush bones. Once a horax scores a hit,
it maintains its lock. Each round this lock causes 1d6 points of ad-
ditional damage. No attack roll is needed for this. A horax’s lock
can be broken by a character (whether the attacked character or
another) who spends an entire round working to dislodge the
beast. The character attempting must still roll for the attack. If
successful, he has pried the beast’s jaws open.

 

 

 

Being insectoid, horax are vulnerable to cold. While ice- and
cold-based attacks do not cause any additional damage, they
have the effect of a slow spell. This effect lasts for 2d6 rounds.

Habitat/Society: The horax are communal creatures, living in
small colonies of 30 + 1d10 individuals. There is no distinction
between male and female horax. Each colony is located under-
ground in a series of chambers. There are several communal
chambers connected to a central egg chamber. Normally, there
are 3d6 young among the eggs (HD 1, AC 7, Dmg 1d6). Other
chambers are used to store food dragged back to the lair by the
horax. These are kept for later use, preserved by the dry air of the
tunnels. These chambers contain whatever treasure the horax
have accidentally collected. Magical items found are most often
weapons or armor from the ‘bodies of dead warriors slain and
brought back by the foragers.

Ecology: Although subterranean, the horax do venture to the sur-

face when prey is scarce in the tunnels underground. They ven-
ture onto only the surface in the hours of dusk, after the hot
desert sun has cooled, but before the chill night air makes them
sluggish. Although they prefer fresh kills, they also scavenge.
They do not seem to have preferences for prey, although they sel-
dom attack other insectoid creatures.

The back plates of the horax can be fashioned into a light-
weight and durable armor (AC 4) by armorers experienced at
handling the stuff. The Glass Sailors of Taladas are among the
best in the world at this art.
Imp, Blood Sea

—ipagon] CINICES -

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN:

FREQUENCY:
ORGANIZATION:
ACTIVITY CYCLE:
DIET:
INTELLIGENCE:
TREASURE:
ALIGNMENT:

Tropical and subtropical Ocean

Very rare
School
Night
Special
Very (11)

E

Chaotic evil

 

NO. APPEARING:
ARMOR CLASS:

10-40
4 or 1 (in mist form)

MOVEMENT: 12, F124 (A), Sw 6
HIT DICE: 5+3

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6 or 1

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Hit only by magical weapons
MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below

SIZE: T (2’ tall)
MORALE: Steady (11)

XP VALUE: 975

Blood Sea Imps, also known as vapor imps, are hateful, vicious
creatures dwelling in tropical oceans They delight in tormenting
all those who dare enter their waters.

A Blood Sea imp can freely polymorph between two forms (po-
lymorphing from one form to the other takes a full turn). One
form is that of a cloud of red mist; two blazing red eyes hover in
the center of the cloud. The Imp’s physical form is that of a bright
red humanoid two feet tall with a protruding belly, clawed feet
and hands, and a pointed tail. It has long ears, curved horns, and
a huge nose that droops over a grinning mouth filled with tiny
teeth. Its skin and eyes are bright red, and red mist continually
oozes from the pores of its body. In both its physical and mist
forms the Blood Sea imp continually cackles, screams, and
groans. A Blood Sea imp can telepathically communicate with
other Blood Sea imps, but it will not communicate with its in-
tended victim.

Combat: When severe storms rock the sea at night, Blood Sea

imps rise from the ocean floor to ambush passing ships. Sailors
are first alerted to the presence of Blood Sea imps by the sounds of
high-pitched screaming and cackling mingling with the shrieking
winds. Those staring into the water notice the waves transform-
ing into a mass of grinning faces, clawed hands, and sharp tails,
all enveloped in a growing cloud of red mist. The imps begin to
push the ship, causing it to pitch and shiver. During the next hour,
the imps transform into their mist forms to overwhelm the ship.

When an imp is in its physical form, it attacks with a chilling
touch that causes 1d6 points of damage (no saving throw), how-
ever, it cannot fly in this form and its AC is 4. In its mist form, it
can fly, its AC is 1, and all attack rolls against it are made with a -2
penalty, however, it can take no physical actions (such as pushing
a ship or throwing a sailor overboard) and opponents contacting
it receive only 1 point of chilling damage. The imp much prefers
its physical form when attacking, as it can cause much more mis-
chief. Blood Sea imp attacks are always accompanied by non-
stop screaming, cackling, and groaning.

 

 

 

 

\ul

 

——————

 

When a ship is surrounded by red mist, the vaporous imps flow
through doorways and ooze into portholes, then polymorph
back to their physical forms. Small misty imps emerge from the
vapor, swarming up the masts, jerking the rigging, and loosening
cargo ropes. The imps always first attempt to disable the ship,
then murder the crew. If any crew members interfere with the
rampaging imps, the imps try to throw them down the hold, lock
them in a cabin, or toss them overboard. Imps have a Strength of
4, and they can only move a character if the total Strength points
of the attacking imps exceeds the character’s Strength. The char-
acter is dragged one foot per round for every point that the imps’
combined Strength exceeds the character’s Strength.

Blood sea imps can only be attacked with magical weapons
other attacks pass harmlessly through them. Blood sea imps can
not be turned, and they are unaffected by sleep, charm, or cold-
based spells. They are likewise unaffected by paralysis or
poisons.

If struck by a lightning bolt, either natural or magical, there is a
10% chance that the imp spontaneously generates a copy of itself
the copy appearing in its vaporous form.

Habitat/Society: As their name implies, Blood Sea imps reside
primarily in the Blood Sea. but some also exist in other tropical
and subtropical oceans. Schools of 10d4 imps live together in
shallow lairs on the ocean floor; these lairs are lined with rotten
vegetation and other debris. The imps sleep in their lairs all day
long, emerging only at night to search for ships battered by ocean
storms. Treasure items are also stored in their lairs: imps aren’t in-
terested in the value of treasure, but they keep various baubles as
souvenirs from ships they have plundered.

Ecology: Blood Sea imps arc oblivious to other sea life, though
they tight fiercely it attacked. The imps do not eat, drink, or
breathe. They are invigorated by exposing themselves to the
thunder and lightning generated by an ocean storm
Insect Swarm

 

 

 

Velvet Ants

Grasshoppers and
Locusts

 

CLIMATE/ Tropical, sub- Tropical and
TERRAIN: tropical or temp-  subtropical/ Forest,
erate/Forest, hills hills, and plains
and plains
FREQUENCY: Very rare Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Swarm Swarm
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day Day
DIET: Omnivore Herbivore
INTELLIGENCE: Animal (1) Animal (1)
TREASURE: Nil Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Neutral
NO. APPEARING: See below See below
ARMOR CLASS: 8 8, FL6 (A)
MOVEMENT: 6 6, FI 18 (C)
HIT DICE: See below 1 hp/20 insects
THACO: See below See below
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: See below See below
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Poison Nil
SPECIAL
DEFENSES: Nil Nil
MAGIC
RESISTANCE: Nil Nil
SIZE: Individual: T (” T (2” long); Swarm:
long); Swarm: see below
see below
MORALE: Unsteady (6) Unsteady (6)
XP VALUE: See below See below

 

As individuals, velvet ants, grasshoppers, and locusts are rela-
tively harmless. But in swarms, these insects can cause immense
damage to fields and forests, as well as threatening the lives of all
creatures in their path.

Velvet Ants

The velvet ant resembles a plump version of the common ant, ex-
cept for the soft fuzz that covers its entire body. The fuzz is usu-
ally red or black, but it can also be yellow, brown, or orange.

Combat: A velvet ant swarm eats everything in its path, animal
matter as well as vegetation. To determine the size of a swarm,
roll 1d100 and multiply the result by 1,000. There are about 100
ants per square foot; therefore, a swarm of 10,000 ants forms a
block about ten feet per side.

If a swarm comes in contact with an obstacle, it turns 90° and
continues. A victim in contact with a swarm has an 80% chance
per round of being bitten and suffering 1d4 points of damage.

The victim must roll a successful saving throw vs. poison or
suffer intense pain for the next 2d4 turns, making all attack and
damage rolls with a -2 penalty during this time.

Each point of damage inflicted on an insect swarm kills 1d20 in-
sects. They may be scattered with smoke or fire; immersion in
water washes them off. If half of a swarm is killed, the survivors
attempt to scatter and hide. If an entire swarm is killed, award
975 experience points.

Grasshoppers and Locusts

The grasshopper is about two inches in length and is usually green
or brown in color. The grasshopper can make leaps of about four
feet. Locusts are a type of grasshopper, with shorter antennae.
They can rub their hind legs against their wings to produce a dis-
tinctive chirp.

 

4

 

 

 

Combat: Grasshopper and locust swarms fly from place to
place in search of lush fields on which to settle and consume.
These swarms move in straight lines and are easy to avoid.

To determine the size of a grasshopper swarm roll 1d100 and
multiply the result by 10,000. Multiply this result by 2 when de-
termining the size of a locust swarm. There are about 20 grass-
hoppers or locusts per square foot (for convenience, assume there
are 20 insects per cubic foot when approximating the size of flying
swarm).

A victim in contact with a grasshopper or locust swarm has a
90% chance per round of being bitten and suffering 1 point of
damage. Additionally, victims within a cloud of these insects
have their vision reduced to 2d4 feet.

Each point of damage inflicted on an insect swarm kills 1d20 in-
sects. They may be scattered with smoke or fire, immersion in
water washes them off If half of a swarm is killed the survivors
attempt to scatter. If an entire swarm is killed, award 2,000 expe-
rience points.

Habitat/Society: Insect swarms are migratory, sleeping at night
wherever they happen to be. Females lay up to 100 eggs every
year. These insects have no leaders or any specialized workers.
They do not collect treasure.

Ecology: Velvet ants eat seeds, grasses, and meat, especially en-
joying carrion. The poison of velvet ants renders them inedible to
carnivores.

Grasshoppers and locusts prefer seeds and grains. Snakes,
mice, birds, and spiders are among these insects’ numerous natu-
ral enemies. Grasshoppers and locusts can be eaten by carni-
vores.
Kalothagh (Prickleback)

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any/Ocean
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: School
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: Q (x 3)
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 2-12
ARMOR CLASS: 7
MOVEMENT: Swi12

HIT DICE: 4+4
THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: lor4
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-2 or 1-6 (x 4)

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Shoots spines

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: L (12’ long)
MORALE: Average (10)
XP VALUE: 270

The kalothagh, also known as the prickleback, is an aquatic ver-
sion of the manticore. Though sluggish and not particularly ag-
gressive, the kalothagh is a known man-eater, which makes it a
creature to be avoided.

The kalothagh is a plump fish resembling a pin cushion. Its
body is covered with four-foot-long spines. Its scales are mottled
with dull splotches of green and brown. It has small black eyes
that bulge from the top of its head, translucent fins, a dark, fan-
like tail. and a smooth, pink belly. Its sharp teeth protrude from
its mouth to form a small beak.

Combat: The kalothagh is 80% undetectable when hiding in

seaweed. If the kalothagh is ‘badly damaged (that is, if it loses
75% or more of its hit points), it inflates a special bladder running
the length of its body, then floats belly-up to the surface. It de-
flates when the danger has passed.

The kalothagh’s primary weapons are its spines. It has a total of
32 spines and can shoot up to four spines per round at targets up
to 90 feet away. A volley of spines is always directed to the same
target, but the target can be in any position relative to the kalo-
thagh except directly under it; thanks to the location of its eyes,
the kalothagh can see in all directions. Once a spine has been
fired, a new one grows in its place in 1d6 weeks.

When a victim is struck by a spine, there is a 20% chance that
the spine becomes lodged in his flesh. The spines are covered with
small curved barbs resembling fishhooks, making it difficult to
pull the spines free. When a spine is pulled from the victim’s flesh,
the victim suffers an additional 1d4 points of tearing damage. The
creature also has a weak bite that inflicts 1-2 points of damage.

Creatures or characters engaged in melee combat with the kalo-
thagh must roll a Dexterity check (with a +2 bonus applied to the
Dexterity score) for each round of combat. A creature or charac-
ter who tails the Dexterity check has been impaled on one of the
kalothagh’s spines and suffers 1-2 points of damage. The impaled
victim has a 50% chance per round of freeing himself if he takes
no actions other than attempting to pry himself loose; if success-
ful, he risks suffering additional tearing damage from the hooked
barbs as described above. If he does not free himself, he suffers an
additional 1-2 for each subsequent round he remains impaled on
the spine.

 

 

 

 

 

 

The spines of the kalothagh contain a weak poison; those
struck by the spines roll saving throws vs. poison with a +4 bo-
nus. If the victim fails the saving throw, he suffers an additional 2
points of damage from the attack, and a +2 penalty to his Armor
Class for the next 2d6 hours A victim can only be affected once
by the poison of a particular kalothagh within the same 24-hour
period.

Though kalothagh are not devoid of intelligence, they seldom
make coordinated attacks. They avoid potential enemies that are
excessively large or appear to be especially ferocious. Because of
their passive nature, kalothagh do not fight among themselves for
prey; all kalothagh that bring down a victim share in the feast

Habitat/Society: Kalothagh can be found in all the oceans of
Krynn, though they prefer warm waters to cold They make
crude lairs in underwater caves or depressions in the ocean floors
and line them with shiny gems collected from sunken ships or
stolen from the treasure caches of other ocean dwellers. Kalo-
thagh seldom stray more than a mile or so from their lairs

Thanks to their spines, mating always ends in the death of the
male. Females lay 10d6 spiny eggs at once a process that always
ends in the death of the female.

Ecology: The kalothagh has little commercial value-in fact,

sailors consider a belly-up kalothagh floating on the surface to be
an omen of economic disaster. Because of the weak poison that
permeates its body, the kalothagh is inedible. Certain primitive
tribes carefully snap the spines from dead kalothagh and use them
for weapons. Some have attempted to use their air bladders as
containers for liquids, but the bladders tend to decay within a few
weeks after removal. The carnivorous kalothagh subsists on all
varieties of prey.
Kani Doll

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Rural societies of any terrain or
climate

FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Nil

ACTIVITY CYCLE: As per the enchantment

DIET: Nil

INTELLIGENCE: Nil (0)

TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil

NO. APPEARING: 2-12

ARMOR CLASS: 10

MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 2

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Continuous attacks

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: T (6” tall)

MORALE: Fearless (never checks)

XP VALUE: 35

In their usual form, kani dolls are created by members of primi-
tive tribes to serve as simple good-luck charms; they have no life
of their own However, when enchanted by evil forces, they be-
come chillingly relentless killers.

Kani dolls are crude representations of humans and animals,
most commonly constructed from wood, cloth, feathers, grass,
and other cheap, easily available materials. A doll’s form indi-
cates its alleged charm—a rabbit doll, for instance, supposedly
gives speed to its owner’s legs, while a raccoon supposedly im-
proves its owner’s dexterity. The dolls are quite detailed; kani
dolls in the shape of a bird are covered with hundreds of tiny
feathers meticulously sewn into the cloth, while kani dolls in the
shape of a rabbit are covered with actual rabbit fur.

In most cases, a kani doll has no actual magical properties and
is no more useful than any other superstitious totem. However, it
is possible to enchant the dolls to grant the charms represented by
their forms. The power of enchanted kani dolls is directly related
to the artistry of its creation. Many people can make attractive,
authentic-looking dol!s, but the rituals required to actually charm
a doll are known only to a few wizards in Krynn’s most remote
tribes. It takes about a month for a skilled creator to make a kani
doll.

Certain tribal mages are able to enchant the dolls with evil
forces. When a kani doll is perverted to evil, it attacks that which
it has been charmed to enhance. Thus, a rabbit doll might try to
chew its Victim’s hamstrings while a raccoon doll might mutilate
its victim’s hands Normal kani dolls are harmless and inanimate;
the statistics listed above refer to the animated perversions.

The enchantments of kani dolls activate them at specific times.
For instance, a cat doll might activate seven nights after it was
given as a gift while a rabbit doll might activate only during a full
moon

Combat: A kani doll always attacks with its mouth or beak. If it
scores a hit, it inflicts 1d4 points of damage, then continues to
chew, causing an additional 1 point of damage per round until it
is destroyed or its purpose is achieved. Certain kani dolls might
be instructed to protect a particular area from intruders, while
others might be instructed to attack the first person or creature
they see, pursuing if necessary. Since a kani doll has no mind, it

 

 

 

 

 

knows no tear. Thus, it never checks morale, always pressing re-
lentlessly to its target

The movement and Armor Class statistics listed above do not
necessary apply to all kani dolls. These statistics can vary accord-
ing to the craftsmanship of a particular doll and the materials
from which it was made. A well-crafted rabbit doll might have a
movement rate of 12, while a hawk doll made of feathers might be
able to fly at a movement rate of 6 (B). A turtle doll might have an
AC of 9, but crawl at a movement rate of 2.

Following are some typical dolls, their typical movement rates,
and their ACs. Each doll’s alleged charm is also listed (but the
dolls don’t actually have these properties).

Kani Doll Characteristics

Alleged
Form Charm Movement AC
Rabbit Speed 12 10
Turtle Safety 2 9
Hawk Sight Fl 6 (B) 8
Cat Stealth 12 10
Great cat Courage 15 9
Dove Love FI 3 (B) 8
Bear Strength 8
Owl Wisdom FI 3 (B) 8
Raccoon Dexterity 9 10
Human Luck 12 10

Habitat/Society: Kani dolls can be found in the villages of prim-
itive tribes throughout Krynn. The vast majority of dolls are
harmless and inactive, when tribesmen discover the existence of
evil dolls, they are immediately burned, burled, or cast into the
sea. However, submerged or buried kani dolls remain active,
ready to strike at anyone unfortunate enough to encounter them

Ecology: Aside from their use as good luck charms, some primi-
tive cultures use kani dolls as toys for their children, or bury them
with their dead to offer protection in the afterlife. Wealthy collec-
tors have been known to pay vast sums for specific kani dolls to
complete their collections.
Kender

Pie ‘ at ‘
—|RAGON] ONCE s+
a a ‘ i i

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical subtropical, and
temperate/Plains, forests, jun-
gles, hills, and mountains

FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Family

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Varies (6-18)

TREASURE: Varies (typical individual: O, X;
typical lair: P, M, Q, X )

ALIGNMENT: Varies, but usually lawful or
chaotic neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1-20

ARMOR CLASS: 8 (10)

MOVEMENT: 6 (9)

HIT DICE: 1

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6 or by weapon

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below

SIZE: S (3’-4’ tall)

MORALE: Fearless (20)

XP VALUE: Varies

Kender are diminutive humanoids who are insatiably curious and
utterly fearless, with an uncanny knack for getting into trouble.

Kender resemble human children, though more heavily mus-
cled. Males are typically 3’ 7” tall and weigh 75 pounds; females
are slightly smaller. Adult kender rarely exceed four feet tall or
weigh more than 100 pounds. Kender have distinctive pointed
ears that give them an elven appearance. They have sandy
blonde, light brown, dark brown, copper-red, or red-orange hair,
usually worn long with many varieties of braids and ponytails.
Feathers, ribbons, flowers, and other colorful items are often
woven into their hair. Kender are fair-skinned, but they tan
quickly, becoming dark brown by mid-summer. Their eyes are
variously pale blue, olive, light brown, and _ hazel.

Kender have been called wizened because of the fine network
of lines that creases their faces beginning at age 40. Their facial ex-
pressions are quite intense; no one seems as happy as a joyful ken-
der or as miserable as a weeping one

Kender clothing varies widely, but tends to be colorful and
bright. Soft leather is a particularly favored material for clothing,
especially if dyed bright colors and tooled with designs. Kender
carry a mind-boggling assortment of small items in their pockets
and belt pouches, such as bird feathers, animal teeth, rings,
string, handkerchiefs, small tools, pet mice, oddly shaped twigs,
foreign coins, and bits of dried meat. Anything that conceivably
could hold a kender’s attention for more than a few seconds will
likely find its way into his pocket, with or without the actual
owners permission.

Combat: Kender fight hard and relentlessly, sometimes coming
up with unexpected tactics that can carry the day for their com-
panions. They are immune to all forms of fear, including magical
fear, and make saving throws against spells and poison with a +4
bonus. When alone and not outfitted in armor, kender cause a -4
penalty to opponents’ surprise rolls.

The kender’s most effective defense is their ability to enrage op-
ponents by taunting them with verbal abuse. Any creature
taunted by a kender for one full round must roll a successful sav-
ing throw vs. spell or attack wildly for 1d10 rounds at a -2 penalty
to attack rolls and a +2 penalty to Armor Class.

 

 

 

 

Kender employ a variety of weapons, and receive a +3 attack
roll bonus when using slings or bows. Their favorite weapon is
the hoopak, a special combination of a bo staff and staff sling.
Made from resilient wood, one end of the hoopak is forked like a
slingshot and has a leather pocket mounted between the forks.
The other end is pointed and shod with metal or hardened by fire.
When used as a sling, it causes 1d4 + 1 points of damage against
small opponents and 1d6 + 1 points of damage against large oppo-
nents. When used as a staff, it causes 1d6 points of damage
against small opponents and Id4 points of damage against large
opponents

Most kender do not tolerate armor any heavier than leather or
padded. Some may use ring mail or studded leather, but only for
short periods. If an adventuring party is lost in the wilderness,
kender have a 50% chance of determining the correct direction to

Habitat/Society: The basic unit of kender society is the family
consisting of parents and their children A kender child stays with
his parents until his early 20s, at which time he becomes subject to
wanderlust. A kender experiencing wanderlust is overwhelmed
by his natural curiosity and desire for action he is compelled to
wander the land as far as he can go. Wanderlust may last until the
kender reaches his 50s or 60s, at which time he enters a life-phase
called rooting—a compulsion to settle down with a mate and
raise a child or two. This cycle of wanderlust and rooting is re-
sponsible for spreading kender communities across the continent
of Ansalon.

Kender seldom have more than two offspring. A second child is
never conceived until the first leaves home with wanderlust. Thus
the parents give their undivided attention to each child.

An entire kender family lives in the same house, usually no
more than a single room, comfortably furnished with stuffed
cushions and wooden furniture. Building materials include what-
ever is available; kender have developed quite a knack for creat-
ing attractive homes from odd collections of stone, wood, brick,
and thatch. No kender home contains locks of any kind.

Kender communities are democratic to the point of anarchy-
every citizen is more or less allowed to do whatever he pleases.
Kender see no reason to impose their views on anyone else. Since

 
Kender

—Ragon cl RICE :

 

evil kender do not exist, there is little need for laws or a formal
government. When an emergency arises that requires coopera-
tion from the kender, they do so naturally; with minimal prepara-
tion, they can become a formidable, unified group.

This is not to say that the idea of government is totally without
its appeal for kender. They have experimented with every con-
ceivable form of government and are more than willing to give
any new type a chance. They also follow any leader for as long as
he remains interesting. Owing to the kender’s low tolerance for
boredom, a new government or new leader seldom holds their at-
tention for more than a few days.

There has never been a standing kender army. The occasional
invaders attempting to occupy a kender village quickly became
discouraged: not only were the kender tearless fighters, there was
nothing much of interest in the village worth plundering, and the
kender made hopelessly inept slaves. In fact, most kender find an
enemy occupation to be a tremendous boost to the local econ-
omy, since the invaders always bring such interesting things for
the kender to “handle.”

Though always welcome, non-kender visitors seldom stay
longer than a week in a kender village—life among the kender is
just too frustrating. It is not uncommon for a visitor to be relieved
of all of his possessions within a few hours. Visitors are pelted by
a constant barrage of questions and rambling, pointless stories.

Kender can be endearingly charming or shockingly vulgar.
They are natural extroverts and enjoy making new acquaint-
ances.

Though most are personable and friendly, they can also be ob-
noxiously talkative and nosy. Since kender do what they want
when they want to do it, they resent being given orders. At the
same time, kender are quite sensitive and can be easily hurt by in-
difference or intentionally cutting remarks.

Kender treasure their friends; if a kender’s friend is injured or
slain, the kender is usually overcome with grief and despair.
Death is only meaningful to a kender when it comes to one whom
the kender knows and loves, such as a family member or an ad-
venturing companion, or when it strikes innocents, such as the
victims of warfare or a natural disaster. In these cases, the an-
guish felt by the usually cheerfully kender is heart wrenching to
behold—the depression lingers for days or even months after the
event.

The concept of delayed gratification is alien to kender. They
thrive on excitement and yearn for new adventures. Some kender
believe that evil creatures are condemned to an afterlife where
they will be bored for all eternity.

The kender’s innate fearlessness gives them remarkable confi-
dence. They remain calm and carefree even in the most life-
threatening situations. The combination of fearlessness,
uncontrollable curiosity, and impulsiveness invariably gets them
into trouble, as they are forever peeking into dark corners and
forging ahead into unexplored places. Kender often allow their
curiosity to overcome what common sense they possess, espe-
cially when encountering an unusual monster. When a kender
displays an uncommonly sensible attitude in a dangerous situa-
tion, it is probably because he realizes that death means never do-
ing anything interesting again.

Kender have a unique approach to personal property and theft.
Their intense curiosity feeds their desire to know how locks can
be opened, how to listen in on other’s conversations, and how to
reach into pockets to find interesting things to look at. Thieving
comes naturally to kender, and they see nothing wrong with it;
what others might call “stealing,” kender call “handling.” Kender
do not steal for the sake of profit, since they have little concept of
value; they are just as happy with a chunk of purple glass as they
are with a glittering diamond. Often they pick up an item out of
curiosity and forget to return it. If caught red-handed with an-
other’s property, they offer an amazing range of excuses: “I forgot

I had it.” “ I found it.” “I was afraid someone else would take it.”
More often than not, kender believe their excuses to be the truth
Ironically, kender dislike the idea of someone deliberately taking
an item without the owner’s permission; to be called a thief is con-
sidered a base insult.

Kender cannot learn to cast wizard spells because of their in-
nate magical resistance, a legacy of their creation

No evil kender are known to exist.

Ecology: Most races shun kender, finding their personalities
and societies hard to tolerate. On the other hand kender have no
prejudices and welcome the opportunity to socialize with outsid-
ers, finding their customs and habits to be quite fascinating.

Kender are as curious about food as they are about everything
else, and they consume anything that looks remotely edible. They
are actually quite skilled chefs, and two of their recipes account
for their only tradable goods. One is called dew drink, an alco-
holic beverage distilled from sundews, gold in color with the fla-
vor of honey. The other is called kender pak, a nutritious
sweetbread made from six different grains, which tastes like cara-
mel and cinnamon. A loaf retains its freshness for two months
and is equal to two weeks rations. Since kender are notoriously
poor businesspeople, they seldom receive more than a few worth
less trinkets in exchange for these products

Kender are fond of pets, the more unusual the better Cats
dogs, and small birds are common but so are worms beetles,
and toads. Kender rarely use mounts, preferring to walk even
over long distances.

Kender Class Limits

Class Max. Level
Warrior
Fighter o*
Ranger 5*
Paladin N/E **
Solamnic Knight N/E *
Wizard
Mage (Renegade) N/E **
Illusionist (Renegade) N/E *
Wizard of High Sorcery N/E ™
Priest
Cleric (Heathen) 6
Druid (Heathen) 5 *
Holy Order of the Stars 12
Rogue
Thief Unlim
Bard N/E ™

* Kender who manage to gain 17 Strength can reach 6th level.
** N/E means not eligible for that class.

Kender initial ability rolls are modified by a -1 penalty to
Strength and a +2 bonus to Dexterity. Kender who are not
thieves have a base 5% chance to perform any thieving skill ex-
cept reading languages (no chance) and climbing (base 40%
chance); these chances never improve except for Dexterity and ra-
cial modifiers (kender are treated as halflings with regard to
climbing). The minimum and maximum ability scores for kender
are as follows:

Ability Minimum Maximum
Strength 6 16
Dexterity 8 19
Constitution 10 18
Intelligence 6 18
Wisdom 3 16
Charisma 6 18
Knight, Death

& ca : Hs é
hI) hll—
“DRAGON ance

—_

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Genius (17-18)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil

 

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 0

MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 9 (10-sided dice)
THACO: 11

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 with +3 bonus
DAMAGE/ATTACK: By weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 75% (see below)

SIZE: M (6’-7’ tall)
MORALE: Fanatic (17)
XP VALUE: 5,000

A death knight is the horrifying corruption of a Knight of Solam-
nia, cursed by the gods to its terrible form as punishment for be-
traying the code of honor it held in its former life.

A death knight resembles a hulking knight, typically taller than
six feet and weighing more than 300 pounds. Its face is a black-
ened skull covered with shards of shriveled, rotting flesh. It has
two tiny, glowing orange-red pinpoints for eyes. Its armor is
scorched black as if it had been in a fire. The demeanor of a death
knight is so terrifying that even kender have been known to be-
come frightened.

A death knight’s deep, chilling voice seems to echo from the
depths of a bottomless cavern. A death knight converses in the
language it spoke in its former life, as well as up to six additional
languages.

Combat: A death knight retains the fighting skills it had in its
former life. Since it has little regard for its own safety and an in-
tense hatred of most living creatures, it is an extremely dangerous
opponent. Still, a death knight retains a semblance of the pride it
held as a Knight of Solamnia and fights honorably: It never am-
bushes opponents from behind, nor does it attack before an op-
ponent has an opportunity to ready his weapon. Surrender is
unknown to a death knight, and it will parley only if it senses its
opponent has crucial information (such as the fate of a former
family member).

A death knight has a strength of 18(00). It usually attacks with
a sword; 80% of the time, this is a magical sword. When a magi-
cal sword is indicated, roll 1d6 and consult the following table:

Roll Death Knight’s Sword

1 Long sword +2
Two-handed sword +3
Two-handed sword +4
Short sword of quickness
Short sword of dancing
Short sword of life stealing

ROB ON

 

 

 

 

 

 

A death knight wears the same armor it wore in its previous life,
but regardless of the quality of the armor, it always has an AC of
0. Hit points for a death knight are determined by rolling 10-sided
dice.

A death knight’s magical abilities make it especially dangerous.
It constantly generates fear in a five-foot radius, and it can cast
detect magic, detect invisibility, and wall of ice at will. Twice per
day, it can cast dispel magic. Once per day, it can use either power
word, blind, power word, kill, or power word, stun. It can also
cast symbol of fear or symbol of pain once per day, as well as a 20-
dice fireball once per day. All of its magical spells function at the
20th level of ability.

A death knight cannot be turned, but it can be dispelled by holy
word spell. It has the power over undead of a 6th-level evil priest.
Its magic resistance is 75%, and if an 11 or lower is rolled on the
percentile roll, the spell is reflected back at the caster (the magic
resistance is rerolled each time a spell is cast at a death knight).

Habitat/Society: The death knights of Krynn are former
Knights of Solamnia who were judged by the gods to be guilty of
unforgivable crimes, such as murder or treason. (For instance,
Lord Soth, the most famous of all death knights, murdered his
wife so that he could continue an affair with an elfmaid.) Death
knights are cursed to remain in their former domains, usually cas-
tles or other strongholds. They are further condemned to remem-
ber their crime in song on any night when one of Krynn’s three
moons is full: few sounds are as terrifying as a death knight’s chill-
ing melody echoing through the moonlit countryside. Death
knights are likely to attack any creature that interrupts their
songs or trespasses in their domains.

Ecology: Death knights have no physiological functions. They
are sometimes accompanied by skeleton warriors, liches, and
other undead who serve as their aides.
Kyrie

cumaTereRRan opie and cobwapieat

rewucence, srg B19
ovement Bree
DaMaceATrAcK (oe by weapon
fae fare)
Monat Sey 1)

yee ac an ae ae of bud men Sill ics dhe
peonacy heavge ae 2 fw hgh, seep wale valige tg we
sued on on ry ving eh dante
eth nges eng ne Tbe and wg Go
[Sllseraze The ow her human sass fama heed sah
$n ros din as and ny ees, czy (Gla War oy

te whe aeocge yew a0 tle van humans ough tach
ge hon Wren nt ey
See gos ste lew wah pone wos ey en

su ih spss Sed dpa node

1h ty can rate bo ca ata poe ound a HG Yo
pois damage bo hey ac con tae Se cape Foe
Fong txts tren enc te dap bes ona onan
‘Rae nn cn ae et a oe

‘nnn splat igre ina ere

foe eat fal eal Hones, ee ened 9

 

blade yoo angnaly whabaod vumeoar ends
<ieaden the lrg sue ig veto epara ocens of
in ve mae oi ys grat dere ede Non

Seto om fw ge aa, ny Can the Notaare whe
‘ents only Ring ety he pra aes
iy starty cain hey had a wah tathe ward 3 he
Er inany sede mass Cyn, oat spi bose ale ao
indent een Your tey hve te mey pe

iio Toya eed ga hho} le

eis i ned ane ig gst pf
Sree mince uta by sratung the yore aces
yen on olor, sds ad fen thoy awe ape fond
sea far we sted hoe Sean donk, wah thoy el fom he
‘Rie cat fe wih Oye eget be ed,
Lizard Man (of Krynn)

 

Jarak-Sinn Bakali
CLIMATE/ Tropical, subtropical, Tropical and
TERRAIN: and temperate/ subtropical/
Swamp
swamp
FREQUENCY: Rare Very rare
ORGANIZATION: _ Tribe Tribe
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any
DIET: Omnivore Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7) Average (8-10)
TREASURE: D J, K
ALIGNMENT: Neutral (evil) Neutral (evil)

 

NO. APPEARING: 10-40 1-10
ARMOR CLASS: 5 7
MOVEMENT: 6, Sw 12 9,Sw9
HIT DICE: 2+1 2+1
THACO: 19 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 or 1 3 or 1

DAMAGEF/ATTACK: 1-2/1-2/1-6 (claw/

SPECIAL ATTACKS:

claw/bite) or 1-4
(tail) or by weapon
Venom

1-2/1-2/1-6 or 1-4
or
by weapon

Squirt blood

SPECIAL

DEFENSES: See below See below
MAGIC

RESISTANCE: Nil Nil

SIZE: L (7 tall) M (6’-8’ tall)
MORALE: Elite (13) Champion (15)
XP VALUE: 270 175

Jarak-sinn are a vile race of lizard men devoted to the worship of
Chislev. All civilized races avoid associating with the vulgar, vi-
cious, foul jarak-sinn. The bakali are the forefathers of the jarak-
sinn; though not as numerous as the jarak-sinn, a few
communities of bakali still remain in Ansalon, with more in Tala-
das.

Jarak-Sinn

Jarak-sinn are stoop-shouldered, thick-bodied creatures covered
from head to toe with thin, green scales. A bony ridge extends
from their broad snouts, between their eyes, and runs down their
spines. They have whip-like tails, which average four to five feet
long. They have sharp, hooked teeth and long claws on their
hands and feet. Their small eyes are either red or pink in color,
and their eyelids are clear, giving them the appearance of always
having their eyes open. Thick pink tongues nearly two feet long
dangle limply from the sides of their mouths: unlike snakes and
other reptiles, their tongues have no sensory functions.

Jarak-sinn wear few clothes. The king, knights, and priests
wear thick leather collars, respectively studded with gems, cop-
per bands, and chunks of bone to distinguish them from the rest
of the tribe. Many jarak-sinn wear bone necklaces and bracelets.
Others etch crude tattoos into their scales using red-hot dagger
blades.

Their language consists of short bursts of hisses, growls, and
rasps. About 15% of the jarak-sinn can understand common lan-
guage, and about 5% can make themselves understood to other
intelligent races, albeit on a rudimentary level.

Combat: Jarak-sinn love combat and eagerly embrace every op-
portunity to engage in bloodshed. Though jarak-sinn pride them-
selves on their combat skills, they are by no means sophisticated
fighters. A typical assault amounts to little more than a forward
charge followed by fierce melee. If jarak-sinn face clearly superior
opponents, they may refrain from charging, lurking in the

 

 

 

 

 

 

shadows or other cover until they can ambush their victims from
behind.

In addition to their claw and bite attacks, jarak-sinn use a vari-
ety of weapons, short swords and long swords being their favor-
ites. They also use daggers javelins, and clubs studded with
sharp pieces of bone (to cause 2d4 points of damage). They never
wear armor, but occasionally employ small shields to raise their
AC to 4.

The jarak-sinn’s spittle is a thick, acidic venom that inflicts
burns on all creatures other than lizard men They sometimes
coat their weapons with this venomous spittle, victims struck
with a spittle-coated weapon must roll successful saving throws
vs. poison or suffer an additional 1d4 points of damage. Since
they lack the necessary jaw muscles, jarak-sinn are unable to
spew their spittle at opponents

A jarak-sinn can strike opponents from behind, using its tail
like a whip to inflict 1d4 points of damage. A jarak-sinn can de-
tach this appendage at will; if an opponent grabs his tail, the op-
ponent may find himself struggling with a writhing tail while the
jarak-sinn flees to safety A new tail can be grown in 1d4 + 8
weeks.

About 15% of jarak-sinn have two loose flaps of skin on either
side of their necks that they can inflate to the size of three-foot-
diameter balloons, these swellings are sometimes effective in dis-
couraging predators. About 25% of jarak-sinn tan emit loud
hisses to frighten opponents; although most intelligent opponents
are not impressed with these sounds, unintelligent animals often
associate the sounds with those made by poisonous snakes or
small dragons, thus making them think twice before attacking

Jarak-sinn occasionally ride grant lizards into battle. The noto-
riously uncooperative lizards obey only the simplest of com-
mands, but they are effective mounts when jarak-sinn are
attacking opponents the lizards perceive as edible. The lizards re-
lentlessly pursue such opponents, gobbling them up as soon as
they run them down.

Habitat/Society: When the gods created the dragons, the elves,
and other races at the dawn of time, Chislev decided to create his
own race for the specific purpose of worshiping him. Thus were
born the bakali, a race of loathsome lizard men that crawled from
Lizard Man (of Krynn)

 
 

—Pagonjancé~

 

the Great Moors of northern Ansalon and proceeded to establish
small colonies in swamps and tropical regions throughout the
land The other races of Krynn, however, did not take kindly to
the bakali, though not particularly aggressive, bakali habitually
kidnapped innocent citzens to sacrifice to Chisley Bakali were
no match for the more intelligent and better-armed races They
were eventually forced to withdraw to Ansalon’s most desolate
swamps, from which they ventured only rarely

Adding to the bakali's problems were their diminishing num-
bers While the other races grew and flourished, the bakal: popu-
lation could barely sustain itself, war and disease both took their
toll Additionally, bakali females produced only a single egg
every five years Desperately, the bakali petitioned Chislev for
help Chislev responded by creating a new species of lizard men
he called the yarak-sinn, for the next 50 years, all offspring of fe-
male bakali were members of this more prolific species

When they matured, female jarak-sinn gave birth to their own
offspring at the rate of 10-20 per year The number of jarak-sinn
soon matched, then exceeded, the number of bakali

But as the population of jarak-sinn grew, so did conflicts with
the bakali The first yarak-sinn leader of note—an ambitious,
scheming male named Krazak—organized a revolt against the ba-
kali All bakali the jarak-sinn could find were rounded up and
systematically executed Some bakali managed to escape, fleeing
in rude boats to the open sea Eventually these last remnants of
the bakali race came upon the continent of Taladas Once there
they quickly established themselves in Blackwater Glade and be-
gan to grow in numbers in the relative safety of that dismal
swamp Rumors persist that there are still some bakali yet alive in
Ansalon, as the rulers of the less-ntelligent jarak-sinn recognize
their usefulness as advisors

Jarak-sinn settlements have few of the elements normally asso-
ciated with a ervilized society There are no formal laws-all dece
sions are made by the king, whose judgments can be as arbitrary
as they are cruel Homes are little more than mud pits or filth-
strewn caves, which the yarak-sinn share wrth snakes, rats, and
other vermin Jarak-sinn lack the ambition to master any useable
skills aside from those that are combat-related, consequently, a
jarak-sinn settlement has no craftsmen, merchants, or artists

A king seldom reigns more than a few years before he 1s assassi-
nated, his assassin becomes the new king The king always sur-
rounds himself with 1d4 + 6 bodyguards, referred to as knights,
knights are selected for their strength (they have a minimum of 15
hit points) and trustworthiness, although kings are usually assas-
sinated by one of their own knights

The community's shamans are in charge of conducting services
in the name of Chislev A shaman always has the spelleasting
abilities of a 3rd-level shaman and has 1d4 acolytes with the
spelleasting abilities of 1st-level shamans There 1s usually one
shaman for every 20 members of a tribe

Tribal members who are not knights, shamans, or acolytes are
all considered members of the community mulitia—all children
capable of wielding a weapon (age 10 and up with a minimum of 5
hp) are considered mature enough to fight

Jarak-sinn spend most of their time eating, sleeping, or cooling
themselves in mud pits When the dark moon of Nuitari 1s in High
Sanction (full moon), which occurs for a seven-day period every
month, the shamans lead the yarak-sinn in elaborate worship
services to Chislev, involving chants, prayers, and numerous
slave sacrifices

Ecology: Though few know of the existence of the yarak-sinn,
those who do despise and fear them The shadowpeople, who oc-
cupy many of the underground caverns coveted by the jarak-
sinn, especially hate them

Jarak-sinn eat small mammals, algae and fungus, human flesh,
and each other They can unhinge their saws to swallow large

prey, such as sheep, though this process is time-consuming (up to
four hours to swallow a sheep) and somewhat painful Their sour
flesh 1s inedible, as are their gelatinous eggs hence, yarak-sinn are
avoided by predators Their hides can be re-worked by skilled ar-
morers to make scale armor (AC 6)

Bakali
Bakali range from slightly shorter than most yarak-sinn to slightly
taller Their hides vary from yellow-green to mottled brown in
color Otherwise they are similar in appearance to the jarak-sinn
Although the bakali are the more intelligent species, the yarak-
sinn consider them inferior in every respect

Bakali are distrustful and suspicious by nature They tend to
keep to themselves and seldom leave their territories To others
they seem savage and cruel, as a race, they have no compunctions
against violence, though individuals may hold more tolerant
views

Though frequently hostile to humans, bakali have a strong
sense of honor They remember both the good and the ill done to
them, and they treat others as others treat them They place great
store in friendships, both among their own kind and with those of
other races

A player can choose to have a bakali player character, if the
DM allows this and the campaign is based in Taladas

Bakali Class Limits

Class Max Level
Warrior
Fighter 10
Ranger N/E*
Paladin N/E*
Solamnie Knight N/E*
Wizard
Mage (Renegade) N/E*
Mlusionist (Renegade) N/E*
Wizard of High Sorcery N/E*
Priest
Cleric (Heathen) 8
Druid (Heathen) N/E*
Holy Order of the Stars N/E *
Rogue
Thief N/E*
Bard N/E*

* N/E means not eligible for that class

Although they are warm-blooded, bakali are vulnerable to cold
and suffer 1 extra point of damage per die of damage caused by a
cold-based attack Their tough hides serve as the equivalent of
AC 7 They are able to move equally well in the water and on
land Bakali do not possess infravision They do have special nic-
tating membranes that can quickly shield their eyes from harm
Thus they gain a +1 bonus to all saving throws against effects
that involve blinding or dazzling of the eyes

Because of their sturdy builds, all bakali gain a +1 bonus to
the Strength and Constitution scores But their lack of educa-
tion and mental discipline cause a -1 penalty to their Intelligence
score, while ther appearance gives them a -1 penalty to their
Charisma score The minimum and maximum ability scores for
bakali are as follows

Ability Minimum Maximum
Strength 9 19
Dexterity 3 15
Constitution 8 19
Intelligence 3 15
Wisdom 3 5
Charisma 3 12
Man (of Krynn)

ey Lae at on
—ifccyonggnce=

 

 

 

 

 

Ice Folk Knights of Solamnia Plainsmen Rebels
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Arctic/Plain, hill, Tropical, subtropical, Tropical, subtropical, Any/ Urban

and mountain and temperate/Plain, and temperate/ Plain,

hills mountain swamp, hill, mountain,
and urban and forest

FREQUENCY: Very rare Very rare Rare Rare
ORGANIZATION: Tribe Solitary or patrol Tribe Band
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any Any Any
DIET: Omnivore Omnivore Omnivore Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Varies (3-18) Varies (7-18) Varies (3-18) Varies (3-18)
TREASURE: Q, V See below See below K, L
ALIGNMENT: Lawful good Lawful good Varies Lawful good
NO. APPEARING: 20-200 1 or 2-12 1 or 2-8 2-20
ARMOR CLASS: 5 (10) 4 (10) 10 See below
MOVEMENT: 6 (9) 9 (12) 12 12
HIT DICE: 1 Varies 1-6 hp 1-6 hp
THACO: 19 Varies 20 20
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 1 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK:
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil See below Nil Nil
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil See below Nil Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil See below Nil Nil
SIZE: M (6’ tall) M (6’ tall) M (5’-6’ tall) M (5’-6’ tall)

MORALE: Steady (12)
or higher

XP VALUE:

Champion (15-16)

Average (8-10) Elite (13-14) or higher

 

 

The men and women of Krynn exist in a variety of different
groups, each characterized by distinct customs, moral codes, and
philosophies. Though the membership of a group may change, its
values remain constant; some of Krynn’s more primitive societies
have remained unchanged for thousands of years.

Several such groups are detailed below, selected to illustrate
Krynn’s cultural diversity. Each group’s hierarchy, attitudes, and
other characteristics are explained, but many variations are likely
to exist. For instance, all members of these particular groups are
presumed to be human, but it is likely, for instance. that elven
tribes or dwarven rebels exist. The ice folk and Knights of Solam-
nia, however, are exclusively human.

Assume that both sexes are represented in all groups; though
there is not an abundance of women in the Knights of Solamnia,
there is no by-law that specifically excludes them. Note that prim-
itive groups, such as the more unsophisticated tribes, are notori-
ously sexist, and one is unlikely to find women in positions of
leadership, except in matriarchal societies.

Ice Folk
The ice folk are a race of rugged warriors inhabiting some of the
most desolate arctic regions of Krynn.

Ice folk are tall, heavyset humans with leathery skin and long,
flowing hair, usually red or light brown. They wear white fur par-
kas and boots to protect them from the bitterly cold weather.
They are fierce and proud.

Combat: Ice folk are peace-loving by nature; however, aggres-
sive actions from opponents spark the ice folk to fight to the
death. Ice folk arm themselves with clubs, maces, battle axes, and
special weapons called frostreavers.

A frostreaver is a heavy battle axe +4 made out of ice. It can be
created only by the Revered Cleric of each tribe and requires a
month to make. A frostreaver can be wielded only by a character
with a Strength of 13 or greater. Temperatures above freezing
cause the frostreaver to melt, rendering it worthless.

Ice folk use iceboats, huge vessels with canvas sails and
wooden runners, to glide along the surface of the ice at speeds

much faster than a man can run. A typical iceboat carries about
15 riders.

Ice folk seldom wear metal armor, but their bulky furs give
them an effective AC of 5.

Habitat/Society: An average ice folk tribe includes about 100
members. The wisest and strongest member, a 12th-level or
higher fighter, serves as chief. The chief has 1d6 personal guards
(10th- to 12th-level fighters) who inflict 1d8 + 4 points of damage
with every successful hit. The tribe’s highest-level cleric (5th level
or higher) serves as the Revered Cleric, he has 1d4 acolytes (1st-
to 3rd-level clerics). The rest of the tribe is equally divided be-
tween Ist- to 4th-level fighters and level 0 workers, children, and
elderly.

An ice folk village is a collection of circular huts covered by
bulky white furs, making it almost invisible against the snow.
Each hut houses a family of as many as 20 members. Furnishings
are simple, little more than a fire pit for heat and cooking and fur
rugs for sleeping. Ice folk villages are often protected by large
snow fences made from the rib bones of gigantic creatures. The
ice folk are nomadic, settling in one place for about a year, and
moving on when the fish supply reaches dangerously low levels

Ecology: The ice folk are fishers and hunters, ice bears being a
favorite source of meat and fur. They keep tubs of slimy grease
made from walrus blubber for cooking and for lubricating the
runners of their iceboats. Aside from the ice bears, they have few
natural enemies, except for on-going territorial conflicts with the
thanoi. The ice folk seldom have the opportunity to engage in
trade.

Knights of Solamnia

The Knights of Solamnia are the noblest of Krynn’s heroes. Their
philosophy is best summed up by the oath to which all Knights
subscribe: My Honor is My Life.

Since the time of Huma, the Knights of Solamnia had stood as
symbols for all that was good. Rut following the Cataclysm,
when the common people cried out for aid, the Knights were
Man (of Krynn)

7 mae ak ae

 

powerless to help. The people blamed the Knights for their per-
ceived inaction. ‘The Knights fell into disgrace, and their temples
and fortresses were besieged.

The Knights who remained were forced to roam the country-
side in secret, fearful that they would be discovered by an angry
citizenry. Still, the Knights held true to their ideals and did what
they could to tight the evil in the world. To this day, the only size-
able group of Knights exists on the distant Sancrist Isle. The rest
operate covertly, concentrated in the villages and cities of Solam-
nia, a sprawling realm in northwest Ansalon.

Hierarchy: The Knights of Solamnia are organized into three
Orders: the Knights of the Crown, the Knights of the Sword, and
the Knights of the Rose. Individual cells of Knights, called Cir-
cles, have been established throughout Ansalon. These Circles
exist permanently in many townships and in virtually every ma-
jor city in the continent. The Circles exist to give aid to all local
Knights. Some of these Circles, especially the ones in Solamnia
and Sancrist, operate openly and are easy to find. In places where
the Knighthood is still viewed suspiciously, these Circles exist
clandestinely and their meetings are held in secret.

The Knighthood is ruled by the Lord of the Knights. However,
this position has remained vacant since the time of the Cataclysm
due to the difficulties in calling together a Grand Circle of Knights
in sufficient numbers to elect a Lord from the eligible candidates.
The position must be filled by either the High Warrior, the High
Clerist, or the High Justice (see tables below), and at least 75% of
the established Circles must send two representatives to vote.

The will of the Lord of Knights is carried out by the High
Knights throughout their respective orders, The High Warrior
commands the Order of the Crown, the High Clerist commands
the Order of the Sword, and the High Justice commands the Or-
der of the Rose. These are nominated and elected by members of
their own Orders without influence from the other two Orders. A
Knightly Council, a group responsible for matters of pressing im-
portance, must be held by a contingent of three ranking knights,
one from each of the Orders.

Knights of the Crown are sworn to protect, serve, and give aid
to any kingdom on the List of Loyalty. This list is maintained by
the three High Knights and is updated periodically. The Knights
are not required to follow the commands or laws of these king-
doms should they violate the standards of the Knights’ personal
code.

All those who wish to become Solamnic Knights must first en-
ter into the Knighthood as squires of the Knights of the Crown.
This is true regardless of what Knighthood they will eventually
serve. Specific requirements and abilities of each Order are given
below. Solamnic Knights are variants of paladins as described in
the 2nd Edition Player’s Handbook. However, there are many im-
portant differences, and the following material should be read
carefully.

The Solamnic Knight Ability Table lists the minimum scores
for each Order. Since all Knights begin as Knights of the Crown,
note that a Knight with the minimum scores is unable to progress
into the higher Orders. Levels, titles, and Hit Dice for each Order
are summarized on the Solamnic Knight Level Table.

Solamnic Knight Ability Table (Minimum Scores)

Ability Crown Knight Sword Knight Rose Knight
Strength 10 12 15
Dexterity 8 9 12
Constitution 10 10 15
Intelligence 7 9 10
Wisdom 10 13 13
Charisma None None None

Solamnic Knight Level Table

Hit
Dice Crown Sword Rose
Lvl. (d10s) Title Title Title

2 Squire of Crown — —

Defender of Crown — —

Knight of Crown Novice of Swords —

Scepter Knight knight of Swords Novice of Roses
Shield Knight Blade Knight Knight of Tears
Shield of Crown Knight Clerist knight of mind
Lord of Shields Abbot of Swords Knight of Heart
Lord of Crown Elder of Swords Knight of Roses
10 Master Warrior Master of Swords Keeper of Roses
10 10 + 2 Lord Warrior Lord of Swords Master of Roses
11 10 +4 High Warrior * Master Clerist Archknight

womr*yau AON.
OC OYR VT BO

12. 10+6 — Lord Clerist Lord of Roses
13 l0+8  — High Clerist * Master of Justice
14. =-10+10 — — Lord of justice
15 10+12 — — High justice *
16 =©10+14 — -

17 =+10+16 — _

18 10+18 — —

* There is only one High Warrior, High Clerist, or High Justice in
each Order. All other Knights who have enough experience
points to reach these levels retain the title of Lord Warrior, Lord
Clerist, or Lord of justice, until such time as they are elected to
High Warrior, High Clerist, or High Justice.
Knights of the Crown: All Knights begin in this Order with
training in the virtue of loyalty Candidates must be presented to
a Knightly Council and be sponsored by a Knight in good stand-
ing from any of the Orders of Knighthood A candidate must
swear an oath to the honor of the Knighthood and to the causes of
the Crown, and swear allegiance to the Order and the ideals of the
Knights of Solamnia. If there is no dissent from the Knights, and
no question of honor regarding the candidate is presented, then
the candidate is accepted into the Knighthood as a squire
Knights of the Crown begin with three weapon proficiencies
and two nonweapon proficiencies, adding one of each for every
two levels of advancement. They are allowed to use weapon spe-
cialization, but they do not gain any of the special abilities of the
paladin listed in the 2nd Edition Player’s Handbook.

Knights of the Sword: A Knight can attempt to enter this Order
only after first rising to Defender of the Crown and only if he has
the minimum acceptable ability scores The candidate is brought
before a Knightly Council at which a Sword Knight of no less
than 7th level is one of the three presiding Knights. It there is no
question of honor brought up, the candidate is assigned a com-
plex quest to test his compassion, his wisdom, his generosity, and
his combat skills. If successful, the Knight becomes a Novice in
the Order.

Knights of the Sword begin with three weapon and two non-
weapon proficiencies (in addition to the proficiencies already ob-
tamed as a Crown Knight), adding one nonweapon and two
weapon proficiencies for every two levels of advancement
Sword Knights gain all of the special abilities of the paladin listed
in the 2nd Edition Player’s Handbook. A Sword Knight also gains
spells as follows, requiring one half hour of meditation per spell
level to gain a spell (a Knight can never meditate more than six
hours once a week):
Man (of Krynn)

= oa < A :
"PRagonjance=

at

 

 

Sword Knight Spells Table

Knight
Level |
6

7

8

9

10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18

Clerical Spell Level

N
oO
BS
ol
a
NI

OoOODOwUANQNATA BRON NE
CMNRABKWYNN BS ll
OB WW Nee

BONN ee pp |

WN ee |
NNR Be] |

3

* These are the maximum number of spells that a Sword Knight
can have at any one time.

Knights of the Rose: Once a Sword Knight has risen to 4th
level, he can petition the Order of the Rose to be accepted into the
Knights of the Rose, if he has the minimum acceptable ability
scores. The candidate is brought before a Knightly Council at
which a Rose Knight of no less than 9th level is one of the three
presiding Knights. If there is no question of honor brought up, the
candidate is assigned a complex quest to test his compassion, his
wisdom, his generosity, and his combat skills. If successful, the
Knight becomes a Novice in the Order.

Knights of the Rose begin with three weapon and two non-
weapon proficiencies (in addition to the proficiencies already ob-
tained as a Crown and a Sword Knight), adding one nonweapon
and two weapon proficiencies for every two levels of advance-
ment.

Combat: Solamnic Knights are fighters of unparalleled courage

and honor. Their highest ideal is to meet a noble death against
overwhelming odds in the cause of justice. They retreat only if
they can be persuaded that a larger interest is at stake.

The Knights employ a variety of weapons. The most frequently
used are bows and swords of all kinds, lances, battle axes, and
spears. Crown Knights of 6th level or higher have a 10% chance
of having a magical weapon. Sword Knights of 6th level and Rose
Knights of 5th level have a 10% base chance of having a magical
weapon: for Sword Knights, this chance increases 10% per level
above 6th, up to a maximum of 40%, and for Rose Knights the
chance increases 10% per level above 5th to a maximum of 70%.
All Knights wear a variety of armor, but chain mail with a shield
is the most common.

Habitat/Society: Though a Circle may comprise 50-100 or more
members, it is rare that an outsider encounters this many Knights
at any one time. More commonly, a solitary Knight or a patrol of
2d6 is encountered. This usually occurs within 4d10 miles of a vil-
lage or large city.

When an encounter with Solamnic Knights is indicated, roll
1d6. On a roll of 1-4, a solitary Knight is encountered. On a roll
of 5-6, a patrol of 2d6 is encountered. To determine the Order and
level of a solitary Knight or a patrol leader (the rest of the patrol is
of the same Order as the leader, but a mixture of lower levels), roll
Id6 again to determine which column on the Knight Encounter
Table to consult; add 1 to the roll if the Knight encounter occurs
within the vicinity of a large village, or add 2 if it occurs within
the vicinity of a major city (the DM is free to vary these modifiers
as he sees fit). On a modified roll of 1-3, use column A; 4-5 =
column B; and 6 = column C. Then roll 1d8 and cross-index the
result with the appropriate column.

Solamnic Knights seldom carry treasure or other valuables.

Most are required to forfeit most or all of their monetary gains to
the greater Knighthood, then draw according to their needs.

Knight Encounter Table

D8 Roll A B Cc

1 Crown 2nd Crown 6th Crown 9th
2 Crown 3rd Crown 7th Sword 9th

3 Crown 5th Sword 6th Sword 10th
4 Crown 5th Sword 7th Rose 6th

5 Sword 3rd Crown 8th Rose 9th

6 Sword 4th Rose 4th Crown 10th
7 Sword 5th Rose 5th Sword 12th
8 Rose 5th Rose 8th Rose 14th

Ecology: Few Knights operate openly. They cannot be hired,
but they can be recruited for missions to further the common
good. Though many are fine metalsmiths and armorers, they sel-
dom sell their wares

Plainsmen

The plainsmen of Krynn consist of a number of tribes organized
into self-contained communities. Most tribes share common an-
cestry with the plainsmen of Que-shu.

Most plainsmen tribes live in areas of Krynn that are otherwise
uninhabited; in fact, many tribes have virtually no contact with
any other cultures. Tribal life is basic and uncomplicated, with
most resources devoted to the day-to-day problems of survival.

Lahutians:

This is a tribe of cannibals living in the tropical forests of cen-
tral and northern Ansalon. The Lahutians are short, stocky race
whose pink skin is covered with fine, blond hair. They wear grass
and silver necklaces decorated with human finger joints and other
small bones They never venture from the forests, traveling in
groups of 2d4 to prey on wild animals and unfortunate travelers.
They have their own language, an obscure tongue that only 10%
of characters with an Intelligence of 15 or higher have a chance of
comprehending.

With their special fondness for human flesh, Lahutians attack
all humans on sight. Half of an encountered group is armed with
spears. The other half wields short bows whose arrows are
dipped in a special poison made from sundew sap. This poison
causes 1d4 points of damage to victims who fail their saving
throws vs. poison. Lahutians wear no armor their AC is 10.

A Lahutian tribe typically comprises about 40 members; half
are fighters of 4th level or less, and the rest are level 0 workers,
children, and elderly. The Lahutians lack the talent for magic;
hence, there are no priests or wizards. The strongest Lahutian
rules the tribe by declaring himself to be a god. The ruler demands
sacrifices and worship from the other members.

The Lahutians produce no products of value. Their treasure, if
any, is seldom more than a small collection of semi-precious
stones.

Lor-Tai:

The Lor-Tai are members of a primitive, docile tribe that in-
habits hillside caves in the northern tropics. All have dark skin,
fair hair, and almond eyes They are sweet-tempered, non-
violent, and not particularly bright. They are open and friendly
to strangers and share their food and homes as long as a visitor
cares to stay.

The Lor-Tai are inept fighters and always flee from an oppo-
nent if given a chance. If cornered, they feebly defend themselves,
with staves, the only weapons the tribe employs About 50% are
armed with the staves, which inflict 1d6 points of damage. Lor-
Tai wear no armor, but their resilient bodies given them a natural
AC of 9.

A tribe usually has 20-50 members. No more than 10% are Ist-
level fighters; the rest are level 0. Lor-Tai spend their time tending
Man (of Krynn)

—iprocpngancd

 

to their sizeable herds of cows and goats. They have an uncanny
rapport with nature; all have a natural ability to speak with ani-
rnals as per the spell. Some are skilled artists, painting colorful
portraits of their favorite animals on the wails of their caves. Oth-
ers are talented musicians, playing beautiful music on stringed in-
struments made from goat bones and cow gut.

Though the Lor-Tai have no wizards among their number, they
have a remarkable aptitude for creating magical potions. If a Lor-
Tai tribesmen is given a magical potion to examine, there is a 25%
chance he can duplicate it by combining various herbs, roots, and
other natural ingredients. This process takes 2d4 days to com-
plete.

Nomads:

This term refers to all of the various plainsmen groups with no
permanent settlements, including those refugees left homeless by
war or natural disasters. Some roam the countryside in search of
new homelands, others have adapted to the nomadic way of life
and drift from place to place.

A group of nomads consists of 2d10 members.

About half are level 0, the rest are usually fighters. No more
than 10% are higher than 2nd level; a group of ten or less has a
single 1st-level fighter, the remainder are level 0. There is a 10%
chance that any nomadic group has a single Ist- to 3rd-level thief
or renegade wizard. Decisions are made by consensus.

Nomads have few possessions. What they own is usually car-
ried on their backs or hauled in crude wagons. There is a 50%
chance that any given nomad is armed, usually with a club, a dag-
ger, or—rarely—a short sword. Armor is used only 5% of the
time, most commonly leather or padded. Though nomads seldom
have anything for trade or sale, they can be good sources of infor-
mation.

Rebels

Krynn rebels are small, mobile groups of fighters using guerilla
tactics to further the causes of freedom. Rebel groups flourish
wherever injustice and oppression prevail.

Because secrecy is vital to a rebel band’s success, members do
not wear uniforms or any other distinctive garb, although mem-
bers of a rebel band may communicate with one another with se-
cret signs or passwords. Since rebels are recruited from all walks

of life, they share no common physical traits. However, rebels all
tend to exhibit exceptional courage, idealism, and perseverance.

Combat: Since their lives depend on their fighting skills, rebels
are superb combatants. Rebels with a year or more of guerilla ex-
perience gain a +1 bonus to their attack roll when using melee
weapons.

Rebel weaponry depends on whatever a group can scrounge.
Roll 1d20 and consult the following table to determine a rebel’s
primary weapon.

D20 Roll Weapon D20 Roll Weapon
1-5 Short sword 14-15 Long sword
6-7 Dagger 16 Blowgun
8-11 Crossbow 17-18 Mace

12-13 Sling 19-20 Battle axe

Armor is particularly hard to come by for rebels; 20% have
shields, and an additional 30% have armor of the armored
rebels, 40% have leather or padded armor, 40% have studded
leather (or leather or padded armor with a shield), 10% have
chain mail, and 10% have chain mail and a shield.

Habitat/Society: Rebels have no permanent base of operations.
If their identities are known by local officials, they seldom sleep
in the same place twice, using caves, abandoned buildings, or the
homes of sympathetic friends.

Rebels try to keep their groups as small as possible rarely hav-
ing more than 20 members. The group is split equally into Ist- to
4th-level fighters, 4th- to 6th-level fighters, and 7th-level or
higher fighters. There is no more than a 5% chance that a rebel is
fortunate enough to acquire a magical weapon About 20% of the
time, a large rebel group has a varying number of wizards,
rogues, and priests; it is rare for more than 10% of a group to
come from these classes.

Rebels carry little or no money. Any treasure they acquire goes
immediately to purchase weapons or medicines.

Ecology: Master survivalists, rebels can live off the land for In-
definite periods of time.
Minotaur (of Krynn)

ee : :
—PRagonijance+--

 

 

Blood Sea Minotaur

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical and subtropical/
Islands and seacoasts

FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Family

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Varies (5-18)

TREASURE: L, M; (©)

ALIGNMENT: Varies, but usually lawful evil

 

NO. APPEARING: Patrol: 1-8; Settlement: 20-400

ARMOR CLASS: 6 (5)
MOVEMENT: 12
HIT DICE: 6+3
THACO: 13
NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-8/1-4 (horns and bite) or by
weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below
SIZE: L (7’-8’ tall)
MORALE: Elite (13)
XP VALUE: Varies

The minotaurs of Krynn are a highly organized warrior race pri-
marily occupying the remote islands of Mithas and Kothas. Huge
and brutish, the minotaurs believe their destiny is to conquer and
enslave the world.

Most of Krynn’s minotaurs are informally known as Blood Sea
minotaurs, named for the treacherous ocean area in which they
are commonly encountered.

The hulking minotaurs exceed 350 pounds in weight and seven
feet in height. Short fur covers their massive bodies; a thin fuzz
covers their faces and forearms. Their fur ranges from red-brown
to near black. Their bullish faces are brutish and ugly, with broad
snouts and wide-set eyes. Sharp, curving horns grow from their
foreheads to a length of 6-12 inches for the females and one to two
feet for the males. Minotaurs have long, wide hands with thick
fingers ending in short claws.

Minotaurs usually wear harnesses and skirts made of leather.
The harnesses have loops and pockets to carry weapons, and are
decorated with military awards and insignia. Some minotaurs
wear rings of steel or other precious metals through their noses
and ears.

Minotaurs were an oppressed race for much of their early his-
tory. They spent many years as slaves of ogres, and another long
period as slaves of mountain dwarves. They were enslaved by the
Istar Empire until the onset of the Cataclysm, which the mino-
taurs saw as divine intervention on their behalf.

After the Istar Empire sunk beneath the ocean the minotaurs
sailed to the islands of Mithas and Kothas and claimed them for
their own. With their new homes separated from the mainlands
of Ansalon by the Blood Sea, the minotaurs believed they were at
last in a position to become a world-class power.

Minotaurs believe it is their destiny to bring the rest of Krynn
under their control. They will go to any lengths to achieve domi-
nation. They believe that the weak should perish and that the
strong should rule. Minotaur armies are legendary for their ruth-
lessness. Their laws are harsh and merciless.

However, minotaurs are by no means mindless killers. Many
are thoughtful and sophisticated. Some are even gentle. Though
dedicated to their own goals, minotaurs will ally with the forces
of good if convinced that it best serves their purposes.

 

 

 

 

Combat: Minotaurs are trained from youth for strength, cun-
ning, and intelligence. Minotaurs are violent, brutal fighters,
bent on slaughtering their opponents to the last man. Minotaurs
view surrender as weakness, and unless they desire slaves or need
prisoners for negotiating purposes, opponents who surrender are
usually executed on the spot.

The minotaurs’ favorite weapons are double-edged axes (dmg
1d10), but they also use flails ( +2 damage bonus when used by a
minotaur), daggers, and whips. Especially strong minotaurs
(those with Strengths of lo or higher) have been known to use a
broad sword in each hand. Armor is leather and use of shields is
rare.

Minotaurs can also butt an opponent who is at least six feet tall
to inflict 2d4 points of damage. They can bite opponents shorter
than six feet to inflict 1d4 points of damage. Minotaurs have ex-
cellent senses and can track prey by scent with 50% accuracy
when following a trail that is one day old or less. For each day af-
ter the trail was made, this chance is reduced by 10%.

Habitat/Society: The fundamental principle of minotaur  soci-
ety is that might makes right. The minotaurs are lead by an em-
peror who resides in the city of Nethosak on the island of Mithas.
Under the emperor is a Supreme Circle of eight minotaurs. The
Supreme Circle advises the emperor and handles the day-to-day
administration of the government. These positions are decided in
armed confrontation in the Circus, a combat arena Where rivals
for the same office fight to the death. Minotaurs claim to have the
only truly classless society, since anyone is eligible to become em-
peror, providing he or she defeats the current emperor in Circus
combat. Minotaur clerics worship Sargas, known as Sargonnas
to the Solamnics.

Families are the foundation of minotaur society, and the honor-
of one’s family is held supreme above all other considerations.
Minotaurs make conscientious parents, supervising the training
and education of their offspring from an early age. Female chil-
dren are offered the same opportunities as males, though females
are vastly outnumbered; because of a genetic quirk, three mino-
taur males are born for every female. When a child reaches the
age of 15, he or she engages in non-lethal combat in the Circus, a
contest that serves as the minotaur’s rite of passage into adult so-

 
Minotaur (of Krynn)

cp - 3
APRagonjance+

 

ciety. Government elders observe the performances of the young
minotaurs, then evaluate their aptitude for various sciences and
crafts based on a series of oral examinations. The young mino-
taurs are then assigned roles in their communities to according to
their abilities.

Each minotaur community maintains a sizeable number of
slaves most slaves are humans obtained from captured
though a few elven, dwarven, and ogre slaves are also in evi-
dence. Virtually all of a minotaur city’s manual labor is
performed by slaves. Slave laborers are treated harshly, though
not with the wanton cruelty common to draconian or ogre mas-
ters.

Minotaur justice is equally harsh, with floggings and beatings
common for most minor infractions such as theft, infidelity, and

assault for more serious crimes, such as murder the quality
is sentenced to death in the term of gladiatorial combat in their

cus. Every month prisoners light a series of battles in the circus
with the winners earthing the right to live until the next month’s
contests personal disputes among minotaurs are also settled in
the circus; minotaur law forbids the killing of one minotaur by
another unless it takes place in the circus.

Most minotaurs are strong and also workers they are particu-
larly tine seafarers. Minotaurs have developed shipbuilding
a line art. Their sturdy through somewhat sluggish) vessels are a
common sight on the waters of the Blood sea some vessels carry
cargo between Mithas and Kothas others are used for fishing
and still others are commissioned as cargo vessels by human
customers though minotaurs have no particular affection for
humans, they willingly accept money from them.

Piracy is also a common activity for the seafaring minotaurs.
They use sleek, light longships plundered from other races for
catching and overcoming their victims, since minotaur-made ves-
sels lack the necessary speed and maneuverability.

Advancement in the minotaur navy is dependent in part on the

number of plundered ships claimed by a minotaur officer.
To the eyes of an outsider, minotaur cities are crude are p
pressive places, The streets care paved with dirt that always seems
to have and the consistency of mud; even in dry seasons the rutted
lanes and filly alleys consist of a gooey mire most buildings are
made of wood, crudely assembled and always unpainted.
wooden foundations are left to rote when a building collapses,
another is constructed in its place.

Most buildings are small clanholds that house families of 3d6
members. Each clanhold has one central room used for eating and
other daily activities. The central room contains a large water
trough used for both bathing and cooking. Adults have private
sleeping areas, separated from the central room by a hanging cur-
tain.

Every block of a minotaur city contains at least one tavern or
inn where eating and drinking goes on at all hours of the day and
night. Large central shopping districts are the liveliest areas of a
city during the daylight hours. Numerous shipyards line the
shores of seacoast cities. Most shipyards are manned by dozens of
slaves overseen by minotaur masters.

Minotaurs not fortunate enough to live in city dwell in small
villages. Villages are haphazard collections of shabby huts cen-
tered around a few stone buildings. Some of the stone buildings
are temples for the worship of evil gods. The largest stone build-
ing is, the residence of the local chieftain, who is referred to by the
commoners as “Lord.” The huts arc the hovels in which the com-
moners live and work.

Ecology: Minotaurs frequently battle with various races on the
high seas. They have only one natural enemy, the kyrie, whom
the minotaurs consider to be trespassers. Battles between these
races have raged for centuries, with the minotaurs slowly gaining
the upper hand.

Minotaurs produce a variety or products among the them smoked
and canned fish weapons and armor (particularly leathers armor
and shields), wool and woven goods and time silver jewelry.
They are fairly active traders with their solidly constructed war
ships in especially high demand. The most commons import is
lumber which is always in demand for construct ion of minotaur
ships and buildings. Minotaurs eat a variety of food bet they
have a special taste for fish, mutton, and raw rains they also
enjoy strong ales and beers.

Thoradorian Minotaurs

Thoradorian minotaurs live isolated villages on tine southwest
ern coasts of Mithas. Thoradorian Minotaurs are considered to be
an inferior class of minotaur—lazier, clumsier, and less intelligent
than their blood sea cousins. Since all of the Thoradorian over
tures for acceptance have been rejected by the bleed sea mino-
taurs, the Thoradorian minotaurs have been tell to their own
devices.

Thoradorian minotaurs are seldom visited by traders or tray
elers, as they have little of value to trade then primary industry
is hip building. Through their ships are notable for their size and
seaworthiness similar ships are available from the Blood sea
minotaurs at much lower prices.

Most Thoradorian buildings are crude stone structures or caves
dug into the mountains owing to their love or labyrinths, many
homes contain winding passages leading from one room to the
next Natural cavern labyrinths serve as Thoradorian versions or
the circus.

Minotaur Class Limits

Class Max. Level
Warrior
Fighter Unlim
Ranger 8
Paladin N/E*
Solamnic knight N/E*
Wizard
Mage (Renegade) N/E *
Illusionist (Renegade) N/E *
Wizard of High Sorcery 14
Priest
Cleric (Heathen) N/E*
Druid (Heathen) N/E *
Holy Order of the Stars 10
Rogue
Thief N/E*
Bard N/E*

* N/E means not eligible for that class.

The initial ability rolls of blood sea minotaurs are modified by a
-2 penalty to wisdom and charisma and a +2 bonus to strength
and Constitution. (The ability rolls of Thoradorian minotaurs are
modified by -3 penalty to wisdom and Intelligence and +1 bo-
nus to Strength and constitution The minimum and maximum
ability scores for minotaurs are as to follows:

Ability Minimum Maximum
Strength 12 20
Dexterity 8 18
Constitution 12 20
Intelligence 5 18
Wisdom 3 16
Charisma 3 16
Ogre (of Krynn)

—<kagonjance+—

is

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN Ogre Orughi
Tropical, subtropical, and temperate/ Tropical and subtropical, Forest, hill,
Plain, swamp, forest, jungle, hill, and mountain
mountain, subterranean

FREQUENCY: Common Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Tribe Tribe

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any

DIET: Carnivore Carnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7) Low (5-7)

TREASURE: Individual: M x 10; Tribe: Q, S, B Individual: Q; Tribe Q x 10

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil Chaotic evil

NO. APPEARING: 2-20 2-12

ARMOR CLASS: 5 5

MOVEMENT: 9 9, Sw 18

HIT DICE: 4+] 4+1

THACO: 17 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 1

DAMAGE/ATTACK; 1-10 (weapon) 1-6 (weapon)

SPECIAL ATTACKS: + 2 to damage +2 to damage

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil Nil

SIZE: L (7’-% tall) M (4’-5’ tall)

MORALE: Steady (11) Unsteady (7)

XP VALUE: 175 175

The ogres of Krynn are bloodthirsty, savage brutes. They are
feared and despised by all intelligent races.

Krynn ogres physically resemble the ogres of other worlds.
They are taller than most humanoids, with thick and solidly mus-
cled bodies. They have large heads with blunt noses, pointed
ears, and high foreheads. A bony ridge covers their beady eyes,
which are colored dull gray or blood red. Long, greasy hair grows
from their lice-ridden scalps, dangling over their shoulders in
matted tangles. Their dry skin, whose color ranges from dark
brown to orange-yellow, is crusted with scabs and filth, and often
covered with hairy warts. Krynn ogres have rows of sharp brown
teeth, caked with grime. Black claws grow from their fingers and
toes. Females resemble the males, though they are shorter and less
muscular.

Krynn ogres wear the skins and furs of animals they have
killed. These are made into loose smocks, long breech cloths, and
heavy capes. These skins are not tanned or otherwise treated be-
fore they are made into clothing, making them stink like rotting
meat. Ogres do not wear gloves or shoes of any kind-their
thickly calloused soles provide protection and traction. Some
wear stone necklaces, others paint their bodies with crude pig-
ments.

Few creatures are as violent and cruel as ogres. With their low
intelligence and flaring tempers, murder, vandalism, and abuse
are commonplace in their societies. Greedy and covetous, ogres
love treasure almost as much as they do bloodshed.

Krynn ogres speak their own language. Ogre chieftains and
leaders usually speak common; 10% of tribesmen other than
chieftains and leaders also speak common.

Combat: Like the ogres of other worlds, Krynn ogres are ex-
tremely dangerous. Not only is violence their common response
to most problems, they are perfectly willing to fight to the death
over the most trivial conflicts. An ogre is too dull-witted to utilize
complex tactics: instead, it engages in brutal melee until either it
or its opponent is dead. So intense is their violence that ogres
must be restrained from pummeling their opponents long after
they have been killed. Strangers are attacked mercilessly, includ-

ing members of other ogre tribes. An ogre often would rather beat
a stranger into submission than waste time speaking with him.

Ogres use spears, battle axes, maces, clubs, and similar melee
weapons. These are either stolen from dead victims, or assembled
from stone, wood, and other common materials. Though crudely
made, ogre weapons are just as effective as their more carefully
crafted counterparts. Ogres seldom use bows, slings, or other
missile weapons; not only do they find them clumsy to use, they
deny the ogres the physical satisfaction of beating and chopping
their victims.

Ogres rarely wear armor, mainly because it is difficult to locate
armor pieces large enough to fit them. Large ogres sometimes
wear thick layers of furs and skins imbedded with chips of stone
to give them an effective AC of 4.

Ogre leaders and chieftains are stronger than their followers
and inflict significantly more damage. A leader is AC 3, has at
least 30 hit points, attacks as a 7-HD creature, and gains an addi-
tional +1 damage bonus to his weapon attacks. A chieftain is AC
4, has at least 34 hit points, attacks as a 7-HD creature, and has an
additional +2 damage bonus to his weapon attacks.

Immature ogres-those between the ages of 5-20 years--have
no more than 3 hit points per Hit Die. They attack with their fists
to inflict 1d4 points of damage. They can use simple weapons,
such as clubs and axes, with a -3 penalty to inflicted damage.

Habitat/Society: Legend has it that the ogres were the first race
to awaken on Krynn. The original ogres were graceful and attrac-
tive creatures, though they had an inclination toward evil. Their
tribes flourished in all corners of the world. An early ogre clan
leader named Igrane tried to convince the other tribes that if they
failed to renounce their evil natures, they would be doomed to a
future of conflict and destruction. The ogres rejected this predic-
tion. Igrane abandoned them to their folly, taking with him a
band of enlightened followers who came to be known as the Irda
(see the “Ogre, High” entry for details).

Igrane’s prediction, of course, came true. The rise of competing
races brought about the end of the ogres’ domination of Krynn.
Ogre (of Krynn)

—PRagonijen ma] CIRCE

 

They were hunted and slaughtered by the elves and dwarves,
driven into exile by the humans, and betrayed and enslaved by
the minotaurs. Additionally, the various ogre tribes warred con-
stantly with each other, reducing their numbers even further. In
the end, the ogres were forced into the most remote reaches of
Krynn, where they remain to this day. The good races avoid
them, while the evil races see them as just another exploitable re-
source.

Ogre tribes make their homes in the grimmest of lands, where
the grass is withered and brown, the earth is cracked and dusty,
and the waters are foul and stagnant. Though ogre cities exist,
most ogres live in small settlements. A typical ogre settlement is a
collection of crude stone huts centered around a large water hole.
Each hut is the home of three or four ogres. The tribal leader and
chieftain (assuming the tribe is large enough to have both) live in
private huts. A hut has no furnishings aside from old furs used for
sleeping and the family’s weapon collection. Outside of each hut
are large racks supporting strips of meat that are drying over
smokeless charcoal fires. A typical village also includes a treasure
hut and a games pit that holds several wolves, bears, or snakes;
ogres enjoy dumping weaker tribesmen into the pit, then watch-
ing them try to scramble out.

An ogre family consists of a mated pair and one or two chil-
dren. Females give birth to a single child once per year. When
ogres reach the age of 20, they move into their own huts to start
their own families, though they still remain with the tribe. Elderly
ogres—those too old to hunt, bear children, or serve the tribe in
any other way —are slain.

A tribe of ten or more members has one leader. In tribes of 20 or
more, there is also a chieftain; in these cases, the leader serves as
the chieftain’s deputy. No more than half of the tribe are females.
Ogres view females as inferior in all respects, useful only for me-
nial jobs and for bearing children. The chieftain (or leader, in the
case of smaller tribes) keeps careful track of the number of fe-
males in the tribe. If the number of female children exceeds the
number of male children, the excess female children are killed.

Each tribe also keeps a number of slaves, equal to about 20% of
the tribal population. Most of the slaves are human, but a few are
elves or dwarves. Ogre tribes are constantly in need of new
slaves, since tribesmen kill them for sport and eat them when they
are too lazy to hunt.

An ogre hunting party usually consists of a leader and about six
adult males, all heavily armed. A hunting trip lasts anywhere
from a few days to several weeks, depending on the needs of the
tribe and the scarcity of game. The leader treats his followers cru-
elly, for instance, using the weakest one as bait to lure hungry
game. Followers sometimes arrange for the unfortunate demise of
the leader on hunting trips. On their return, they report the loss of
the leader to the tribe, then one of their number claims the leader’s
position.

Ogre leaders and chieftains are absolute rulers of their tribes.
Crimes against the tribe include betrayal, theft, unjustified mur-
der, and cowardice. Punishment for all such crimes is death, usu-
ally a lingering and painful one. Criminals might be hung upside
down on a cliff to be roasted alive in the sun’s rays, sealed in a bag
with poisonous snakes and thrown into the sea to drown, or sunk
in a quicksand bog while the tribe watches and cheers.

Ogres are required to bring all treasure taken from defeated
victims back to their village. The chieftain (or leader in smaller
tribes) claims half for himself. The ogres who retrieved the trea-
sure are given a small share, usually no more than 10%, and the

rest is placed in the treasure hut. The chieftain (or leader) awards
treasure to tribesmen for special achievements, such as defeating
powerful enemies; invariably, the chieftain presents most of these
special awards to himself.

Ecology: All intelligent races go out of their way to avoid ogres.

However, evil races occasionally employ ogres in their armies.
The ogres are too stupid and undependable for complicated mis-
sions, but they willingly accept all manner of dangerous and dis-
tasteful tasks if the price is right. Some minotaur communities
keep ogres as slaves.

Ogres hunt wolverines, wolves, and other woodland creatures
for food, but they are also fond of human, elven, and dwarven
flesh; kender and gnome meat is considered a delicacy. Ogre fish-
ermen scavenge the shorelines for dead fish, since this is easier
than catching them, and dead ones are just as tasty as live ones.
No other races trade with ogres, but ogre tribes occasionally
trade with each other. Such transactions often erupt in violence.
One tribe, for instance, might trade animal skins and ale for a sec-
ond tribe’s gems and weapons. When the second tribe becomes
drunk from the strong ale, the first tribe slits their throats and
takes what they want.

Orughi

The orughi are an ogre race dwelling on remote islands north of
Ansalon. They are shorter, tatter, and duller than most ogres, but
they are no less aggressive. They have stringy golden hair, oily
gray skin, and webbed hands and feet, enabling them to swim at
twice their land movement rate.

Though good fighters, the orughi are not as strong as other
ogres and are more prone to panic. When possible, orughi try to
lure their opponents into the sea; because of their swimming skill
and the fact that they can hold their breath for 20 rounds, they are
dangerous opponents in the water. Orughi use battle axes and
daggers and also carry special weapons called tonkks. These
weapons, resembling iron boomerangs connected to long metallic
cords, are used by the orughi to capture birds. The tonkks inflict
no damage but can be used to ensnare victims up to a distance of
30 yards (they cannot be used in the water)

Because of their skill with these weapons, orughi attacks with
tonkks are made with a +3 bonus to the attack roll (non-orughi
use tonkks with a -2 penalty). The cord of the tonkk rapidly
wraps itself around a successfully attacked victim; once per
round, the victim can attempt a Dexterity check with a -2 penalty
If he succeeds, he has untangled himself. If he fails, he must roll a
Strength check with a -4 penalty. If the Strength check falls, the
victim is pulled ten yards closer to the orughi who entangled him.

Orughi live in crude wooden shacks on the shores of their is-
lands; they spend most of their time hunting and flshing. They
worship Zeboim, the evil Queen of the Sea, and build elaborate
shrines in her honor near the water’s edge. These shrines, resem-
bling cylindrical towers of stone, can be seen from miles away;
experienced sailors recognize them as a sign of an orughi settle-
ment.

The orughi have no formal government. The eldest males of
each family collectively rule the tribe. Disagreements are settled
by combat. Orughi collect less treasure than other ogres. Their
treasure caches seldom contain magical items, but usually include
an ample supply of pearls and other gems recovered from the
ocean floor.
Ogre, High (Irda)

—PRagonjancd—<

 

cumareyrennain Trapial aubtrpreal_ and
seperate) Pan treet

seamp, jungle. bl mou min

Frequency: vey ee
INTELLIGENCE arm (520
measune Indveotual LM
Family QF
Srmon Lass Bn,
movement om
Damactarrack: 110 Yweapoet
Sze Mean
monate Stedy 121

Trda are ll slender creatures scoring 2 fect hight end
Srrdsnced by thar hom mascks Tho akntonse range tram mid
Fp rt crcully combed Thai drawn face and denaping spol
bya modest pace a evmly auch an an ermal pn = pl me
cand te form im many ways They eon change ther height By
Give fash ond human ‘The nda shopechanging. ably
bp the wiolener tat pevadialh racks the nations ot Keyan

‘Though they bear fo anos tavard other ace Ia have
never been fully ocaped im any other altar, then i Bese
Tate are tid af the mine apcont ogres whe would return ane

 

 

 

Zs

sir

bly tn buried davn and bled by 4 supentioae paps bee

slilt are unconman among them Gwen the option de mould

‘Thanks t2 their ogre tentge and superior atength Ids a
capable ot iting TaI0 pana of damage wth a prc vspan
they am poor mslee combatant. when Tela attmpt ty was any
they dato with a1 penalty tthe wack roll For that mean
such ae vine bots our fat beg vine waghted on both onde
Wath hook hayes stone that entinge a entim up m2 yards
free hime the sacra in Deer check wh = 2 penal]
and clam tale [balls af nad chy imbedded with shamp tarts
Throw ve pasanl

   

Gun types include sleep pander toms ist must rol cams
fulaaving throva va poban ar mente the eece ot 2p pall
etalym pavder tombs |vrctine must fall suerastel saving
{hrovs vs) paralyzaton of be paralysed for 244 rounds) and
Blindness pander bombs [viene mast roll suzestel acing
runes)
Ogre, High (Irda)

—pRagenjancge

 

highest level they can use. Irda who are Changer Adepts or
Changer Savants (see below) use their superior shapechanging
skills to frighten their opponents (by changing into a minotaur or
death knight) or to escape from them (by changing into a mouse
or a bird).

Irda feel awkward in armor and wear it only in the most ex-
treme circumstances. They prefer the lightest armor, such as pad-
ded armor, and, of course, refuse to wear leather armor or any
other protective clothing made from animals.

The Irda’s relatively low Constitution makes them more vul-
nerable to the effects of poison than most other races. Whenever
Irda must save vs. poison, they do so with a -1 penalty.

Habitat/Society: The Irdanaiath, an ancient text held sacred by
the Irda but unknown among the other races of Ansalon, explains
the origin of the high ogres. Though it is commonly believed that
elves were the first race to awaken in the Age of Dreams, the Irda-
naiath suggests that the ogres were the first. In the dawn of the
world, the ogres were the fairest of all the races. Their dark grace
and savage beauty were unsurpassed, yet their hearts were cold
and bent toward evil.

When ogres walked the world as its dominant race, they had
occasion to interact with humans. In their dealings, the humans
unwittingly gifted a great and powerful ogre clan leader named
Igrane with free will. Igrane began to look upon the world with
new eyes.

The gift of free will spread among Igrane’s clansmen, who came
to be called the Irda, until they all saw the debasement that would
inevitably result from their evil ways. They tried to convince
other ogre clans of their folly, but their pleas were curtly dis-
missed. Civil wars erupted among the ogres, wars fought in
places hidden from the eyes of men.

In time, the Irda removed themselves from contact with the rest
of the world. They found haven on an island they named Anaia-
tha. This refuge was located in the northern oceans of Ansalon,
far from all other civilized areas. Here the Irda could live undis-
turbed. The ogres who did not foresee their debasement eventu-
ally fulfilled Igrane’s prediction, becoming uglier and more
misshapen until their appearance matched the evil in their hearts.

The onset of the Cataclysm upset the Irda’s life of pastoral bliss
on Anaiatha. The forces of evil, whose power had blossomed in
the wake of the Cataclysm, discovered the Irda’s island and _ at-
tacked. Though the evil forces were eventually repelled, many
Irda were captured and taken to Ansalon.

When the forces of evil were eventually defeated in the War of
the Lance, the surviving captive Irda were freed. These Irda still
wander the lands of Ansalon in disguise, desperately trying to
find a way back to their homeland of Anaiatha. The Irda are usu-
ally alone, but occasionally small groups of 1d10 Irda are discov-
ered roaming the countryside. Families may be encountered; the
parents’ fondest wish is to find a way to their island home, if not
for themselves, then for the sake of their children.

A variety of magical powers protect Anaiatha from discovery,
including a permanent hallucinatory terrain spell that makes the
island appear to be a calm stretch of ocean. However, wandering
Irda can hear the telepathic call of their homeland during the High
Sanction (full moon) of Solinari, the most distant of Krynn’s three
moons. During these times, which last for a period of nine days
once every 36 days, the Irda can find their way across the ocean
to Anaiatha, assuming they have a ship or other means to make
the journey. Unfortunately, the journey lasts far longer than the
duration of High Sanction, and few lost Irda are ever able to re-
turn to Anaiatha on their own.

Anaiatha is a tropical paradise, filled with lush vegetation and
friendly animals. The Irda have no permanent dwellings, making
their homes in caves and valleys, and relocating as the spirit
moves them. They acquire few possessions, although they are

fascinated by the beauty of gems and jewelry Most have accumu-
lated small caches of coins and other treasure, to be used if neces-
sary to bribe or otherwise buy off unwelcome intruders.

The Irda are governed by a king who rules as the absolute mon-
arch. All Irda kings can trace their lineage to lgrane. A king rules
until the age of 400, at which time one of the king’s progeny suc-
ceeds to the throne. A king can be either male or female and is
usually the oldest of the former king’s children.

Irda give birth to 1d4 children every 50 years. Irda are consci-
entious parents, beginning instruction in all of the arts and sci-
ences within the first few weeks of a child’s life. Of all their
lessons, the most important is the art of shapechanging. With dili-
gent practice, most Irda have mastered basic shapechanging by
the age of 20, enabing them to disguise themselves as humanoids
at will. An Irda with an Intelligence of at least 16 can study to be-
come a Changer Adept once it reaches the age of 50. Learning to
be a Changer Adept takes at least ten years of study, but once
mastered, a Changer Adept can shapechange, as per the 9th-level
wizard spell, up to three times each day An Irda with an Intelli-
gence of at least 18 can then study to become a Changer Savant
when he reaches the age of 100. This requires at least 50 years of
practice A Changer Savant can shapechange at will.

Ecology: Irda strive to live in perfect harmony with nature. An
Irda will not intentionally harm a living creature unless his own
life is at risk. For these reasons, Irda do not wear or use leather,
wool, or any other products from animals. They are strict vege-
tarians, enjoying all varieties of fruits, grains, and vegetables.
Not only do they avoid meat, they also refuse to eat eggs or drink
milk. Irda have no taste for alcoholic beverages of any kind

Irda do not engage in trade, nor do they create products of any
value to other races. Outsiders occasionally seek them out for in-
formation about exotic plants or animals. Irda usually trade such
information in exchange for the safe return of a lost friend or rela-
tive still wandering the lands of Ansalon.

High Ogre Class/Level Limits

Class Max. Level
Warrior
Fighter Unlim
Ranger Unlim
Paladin Unlim
Solamnic Knight N/E*
Wizard
Mage (Renegade) N/E *
Illusionist (Renegade) N/E *
Wizard of High Sorcery Unlim
Priest
Cleric (Heathen) N/E *
Druid (Heathen) N/E*
Holy Order of the Stars Unlim
Rogue
Thief Unlim
Bard N/E *

* N/E means not eligible for that class.

The initial ability rolls of high ogres are modified by a -2 penalty
to Constitution and a +2 bonus to Dexterity, Intelligence, and
Charisma. The minimum and maximum ability stores for high
ogres are as follows

Ability Min Max Ability Min Max
Strength 12 18 Intelligence 5 20
Dexterity 8 20 Wisdom 10 18
Constitution 12 16 Charisma 15 20
Phaethon

 

 

 

CLIMATE/ Phaethon Elder
TERRAIN: Mountains Mountains
FREQUENCY: Rare Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Family Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day Any

DIET: Omnivore Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12) Highly (13-14)
TREASURE: (I) Nil
ALIGNMENT: Lawful neutral Lawful neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1-10 1

ARMOR CLASS: 3 (8) 2 (8)
MOVEMENT: 12, FI 18 (C) 12, FI 18 (B)
HIT DICE: 4 6

THACO: 17 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 1
DAMAGF/ATTACK: 3d6 or by weapon 3d8 or by weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Flame hug Flame hug

SPECIAL DEFENSES: +3 to saving

throws +3 to saving throws
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil 5%
SIZE: M (& tall) M (6’ tall)
MORALE: Steady (11-12) Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 270 975

In their normal state, phaethons [ook just like very thin, short
half-elves Their hair color varies, though bright, coppery red is
common Their skin tends to be ruddy and weathered AIl
phaethons, however, have dark, brown eyes

The clothing of phaethons is sample and rustic They com-
monly wear a plain, waist-length tunic with baggy trousers which
are gathered at the ankles Sandals are worn in summer, replaced
by soft boots in colder weather The only really colorful articles
of clothing are a brightly colored and embroidered sash which is
wound around the waist, and warm, wool caps, which are woven
in intricate patterns

The thing that sets phaethons apart is their ability to instantly
sprout a set of magnificent, flaming wings, simply by willing
them into existence With these wings they can soar across their
native mountains with the grace of an eagle and the splendor of a
phoenix

Combat: Phaethons are tirelessly vigilant in their home regions
and very difficult to catch unawares; all phaethons gain a +1 bo—
nus to their own surprise rolls

Phaethons are usually armed with a knife and a quarterstaff If
they are expecting trouble, they may bring along spears and bows
as well Leather armor is worn when they leave their settlements,
giving them AC 8

In a one-on-one fight, a phaethon uses its knife and quarterstaff
if it has a good chance to win (ie, if it’s fighting something with
only 1 or 2 Hit Dice) Against an opponent with 3 or more Hit
Dice, the phaethon ignites its wings and uses them to batter the
opponent The combination of clubbing and burning causes 3d6
points of damage

Alternatively, the phaethon can try to wrestle with its oppo-
nent A successful attack causes normal wrestling damage (2
points for a phaethon) plus 1d6 points of flame damage If, how-
ever the phaethon achieves a hold that can be maintained from
round to round, it automatically inflicts 3d6 points of damage
each round, as long as the hold is maintained (opponent can roll a
Strength check, with a -2 penalty, every round to break free)

Besides making the phaethon more lethal, the heat and light
from the wings improve its AC to 3 Also, while its wings are
aflame, it receives a +3 bonus to all saving throws vs flame or
heat attacks of any sort

 

 

 

 

Phaethons never attack anyone without a good reason Stran-
gers nearing the phaethons’ territory arc watched carefully from
the first time they are sighted to determine their intentions If the
strangers behave well and treat the mountains with respect, the
phaethons do not molest them unless the phaethons are directly
threatened If the strangers are destructive and disruptive, the
phaethons still consider the situation carefully before launching
any attack Even if the characters are obviously evil, the
phaethons let them pass if they seem destined for some other
place Only if the intruders seem bent on seeking out the
phaethons’home and attacking it or are causing needless destruc-
tion in the area do the phaethons consider attacking

If the phaethons do consider an attack, they will first try to in-
terrogate one of the intruders A handful of experienced fighters
(or one or two elders, if available) sneak into the intruders’ camp
at an opportune moment and kidnap one of the intruders This
captive is quickly spirited away to a safe location away from the
phaethons’ homes and made to drink a truth draught concocted
of locally grown herbs and fermented roots (the formula for this
truth draught is known to only a few of the most prestigious
phaethons) After drinking the truth draught, the prisoner is
questioned regarding the group’s origin, destination, and mis-
sion If the answers to these questions are satisfactory, the pris-
oner is led back to an area very near his companions and released
when the truth draught wears off, he remembers nothing

It, on the other hand, the prisoner’s answers indicate that the
group presents a danger to the phaethons, the prisoner is executed
(mercifully) and an ambush prepared for the rest of the group

Once the decision to attack is made, the phaethons are ruthless
and merciless foes If the phaethons believe that their opponents
will carry along wounded comrades rather than abandon them to
their fate, the phaethons aim their attacks to wound and incapaci-
tate rather than kill This burdens the enemy with wounded so-
diers, slows them down, and lowers their morale If the enemy
abandons its wounded soldiers, then the phaethons fight only to
kill

In either case, their standard tactic is hit and run Phaethons
hide in rocks and ledges overlooking an area where they expect
the enemy to pass When most of the enemy group has gone by,
the phaethons ignite their wings and swoop down on the tail of
Phaethon

 

the column, fighting until each attacker has killed or incapaci-
tated one enemy, and then fly away to safety. The attacking group
always leaves one-third of its members posted on the overlooking
rocks as a reserve in case a retreat becomes necessary, the
phaethons who attacked (and are presumably tired and
wounded) flee while the reserve delays pursuers.

It the phaethons believe that they have enough of an edge over
their opponents, they may abandon the hit-and-run attack and
launch an all-out assault. Even in this case, however, they still
leave a reserve in case something goes wrong. If the attack is go-
ing well, the reserve may also be ordered to join in the attack and
help finish the job.

Habitat/Society: Phaethon society is essentially the same as all
other demihuman societies. The basic group is the family, which
consists of an adult male, adult female, and a variable number of
offspring. The typical family has one to three children.

Phaethons have a predominantly agricultural society. Their
farms are built on the steep, terraced slopes of the mountainsides
surrounding their homes. They raise grams, fruits, and vegeta-
bles, herd sheep and goats, and keep rabbits and chickens.
Phaethons work hard and take tremendous pride in their farms
and buildings. Their settlements, which consist of a dozen or so
family buildings and plots surrounding a central village square,
are always well ordered and immaculately clean.

To a phaethon, honesty and truthfulness are more important
than any other quality. Lying for any reason is considered a more
grievous crime than stealing. But crime of any sort is almost un-
known among phaethons. Their devotion to lawfulness and hon-
esty is so strong that many of them have a hard time
understanding the concept of willfully committing a crime.

This devotion to honesty extends beyond the spoken word and
respect for property. To phaethons, actions really do speak much
more loudly than words. A man who lights a fire and then lets it
go out through neglect is considered foolish. A man who chops
down a tree and then lets it lie is considered a complete loss.

These attitudes cause a deal of friction when phaethons deal
with other demihuman races. They are always willing to judge in-
dividuals on their own merits rather than the faults or strengths of
others but telling even the slightest untruth for any reason per-
manently blemishes that person’s reputation.

Characters who are sent into the mountains to deal with the
phaethons for any reason whatever must be prepared to be scru-
pulously honest at all times and about all things.

To avoid problems, phaethons customarily do not question
each other or outsiders about their personal lives unless they are
from the same family. The desire to give an honest answer often
conflicts with the need for privacy or the need to not insult
friends. Therefore, phaethons do not ask leading questions with-
out first preparing themselves for the worst. For a stranger or an
outsider to ask such questions is considered rude at best and a per-
sonal challenge at worst

Ecology: Phaethons want nothing more than to live lives of
quiet contentment amidst their beloved mountains. They pro-
duce no items for trade because they are completely self-sufficient
and have no need for imported goods. When the affairs of the
outside world impose on the phaethons culture, however, they
are ruthless and uncompromising in protecting their land

Young phaethons learn to fly in the same way they learn to
walk; by trial and error. This ability usually develops by the age
of five or six.

Phaethons do not spend a great deal of time flying; it is a luxury
to them, something to be done when work is finished. Still, on

calm summer evenings, groups of them can be seen soaring above
the peaks and swooping through the valleys.

Elder Phaethon

The life expectancy of most phaethons is 90 to 100 years. For a
reason not even the phaethons understand, some do not die of old
age. instead, sometime around their 90th year, they are overcome
by a desire to fly toward the sun. They climb, and climb, and
climb ever higher until either exhaustion or lack of oxygen or
both causes them to pass out. As they plunge back toward Krynn,
a marvelous transformation takes place and as they regain their
senses, still thousands of feet above ground, they discover that
they have metamorphosed into elder phaethons.

Elder phaethons are taller than phaethons, with snow white
hair, black pupils, and copper-colored skin. Their flaming wings
are brilliant and at least 30 feet from wing tip to wing tip. They
can, quite literally, dance in the air.

Combat: Elder phaethons use much the same tactics in combat

as normal phaethons, but they are solitary. They rely more on
their speed and agility in the air to strike their enemies with multi-
ple passes. They display the same ruthless cunning as normal
phaethons.

One or two elder phaethons are often found accompanying
groups of normal phaethons that are flying to intercept intruders.
The presence of the elder phaethon raises the morale of the nor-
mal phaethons by 2.

Habitat/Society: Elder phaethons are solitary. They still know

their family and friends, but they have no need or desire to return
to them or to their farms. ‘They spend their days soaring through
the mountains, scouting for intruders, lost travelers, and any-
thing else that is out of place or unusual. They are invaluable
guardians for the phaethon settlements in that little happens in
the mountains without their knowledge.

Most of an elder phaethon’s time is spent either in flight or sit-
ting atop a mountain and scanning the world around. A pano-
ramic vista and air beneath their wings seem to be their only
concerns

Ecology: Elder phaethons neither hunt nor gather. Their food

requirements are very slight and are met entirely by the inhabit-.
ants of the phaethon settlements under their guardianship. The
people of these settlements leave food out in the open and, ap-
proximately once a week, an elder phaethon stops by to pick up
the food and relay any pertinent messages. These visits are al-
ways brief and formal.

Elder phaethons have been known to look after villages of hu-
mans and demihumans as well as those of normal phaethons, if
the humans and demihumans have demonstrated that they are
worthy of protection. If the village ever neglects to leave food for
the elder phaethon or lies to him in any way, he will forsake that
village forever.

However, if a village is under his wing, so to speak, he will de-
fend it with his own life, if necessary.

In the absence of violence, an elder phaethon can live another
150 to 200 years.
Shadowperson

Bay | r

i : 3 Te ai is -
— GoM ea
a ar ei . _

 

 

 

Shadowperson Revered Ancient One
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any/Subterranean Any/Subterranean
FREQUENCY: Rare Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Clan Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night Any
DIET: Omnivore Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12) Genius (18)
TREASURE: Nil Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral (good) Neutral good
NO. APPEARING: 2-40 1
ARMOR CLASS: 2 Nil
MOVEMENT: 12, FI 18 (C) Nil
HIT DICE: 3+1 Nil
THACO: 17 Nil
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 Nil
DAMAGE ATTACK: 1-8 (shadowstaff) Nil
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below Nil
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil Nil
SIZE: M (5’ tall) Nil
MORALE: Steady (11) Nil
XP VALUE: 175 Nil

The shadowpeople are a race of mammals that lives underground
in small self-contained communities One of the oldest races of
Krynn, they are little known to the outside world.

Shadowpeople resemble slim, gangly apes. They have hairy
heads with small flat noses, pointed ears, and sharp fangs, two of
which protrude above their lower lips when their mouths are
closed. Their eyes are green or amber and resemble those of a cat.
They have long claws on their hands and feet. Smooth fur, either
black or dark brown, covers their bodies. A long, stretchable
membrane connects their arms to their flanks. The membrane en-
ables them to glide through the air, covering ten feet of ground for
every foot they drop (for instance, a shadowperson dropping
from a ten-foot ledge could glide 100 feet).

When in their subterranean homes, shadowpeople wear few
clothes. Their fur provides sufficient warmth, and they have no
interest in body decoration. On their rare trips to the surface,
they are likely to wear long, dark robes and hoods to conceal
their identities

To the surface-dwelling races of Krynn, shadowpeople are
commonly regarded as creatures of myth. Cherishing their pri-
vacy the shadowpeople have gone to great lengths to preserve
their reputation as nonexistent creatures, seldom interacting with
other races and maintaining their communities far from other civ-
ilized outposts. Shadowpeople are, in tact, a kind and benevolent
race, capable in drastic situations of uniting with good citizens of
other races to promote their common interests.

Shadowpeople can communicate in a series of squeaks and
growls that forms a primitive language, but they are much more
likely to use their advanced mental abilities to send and receive
messages. All shadowpeople can send and receive thoughts tele-
pathically to creatures within a 60-foot range, assuming the
sender and receiver share a common language and that they are
not separated by more than three feet of stone, three inches of
iron, or any solid sheeting of lead, gold, or steel. Additionally,
shadowpeople can use ESP at will, as per the 2nd-level wizard
spell, up to a range of 50 yards.

Combat: The two classes of shadowpeople are warriors and
counselors. The counselors are unskilled in combat; they depend
on the warriors for protection Shadow warriors are skilled and

 

 

 

 

able fighters, striking quickly and silently. Each shadow warrior
employs a wickedly curved hook called a shadowstaff to both at-
tack and restrain opponents. Once an opponent has been impaled
on the hook of a shadowstaff, the opponent’s attacks are ham-
pered and he continues to take damage from the hook. The victim
suffers a -2 penalty on all attack rolls and sustains an additional
1d8 points of damage every round until one or the other of the
combatants is dead or until the fight ends. An impaled victim is
also unable to cast spells. The construction of a shadowstaff is
such that is very difficult for a victim to pull himself free once he
is impaled; if he takes no other actions and succeeds in Dexterity
checks for two successive rounds with a -2 penalty, he has freed
himself from the shadowstatf.

The ESP ability of the shadowpeople accounts for their low Ar-
mor Class. In combat, they are able to anticipate the actions of
their enemies and can take the appropriate measures to defend
themselves. Shadowpeople cannot be surprised by any sentient
creature within 60 feet.

The shadowpeople’s most important defense is the mindweave,
a ritual undertaken by shadow warriors prior to venturing into
situations of potential danger. The mindweave ritual lasts about
one hour, during which time the participants link hands to form a
large circle, then chant in unison and concentrate. During the
mindweave, the shadowpeople use their telepathic abilities to tie
all of their minds together. For 1d4+4 hours after the ritual, the
shadowpeople share a collective awareness that enables them to
move, fight, and defend in perfect unison, giving them a +1 bo-
nus to all attack rolls and saving throws. Characters of other
races invited to participate in the mindweave can also receive the
benefits of the ritual if they succeed in an Intelligence check with a
-5 penalty.

Though good fighters in darkness, shadowpeople are severely
handicapped when fighting in the light of the sun. When the sky is
overcast, they can execute normal actions, but do so at great
pain, causing a -2 penalty to all attack rolls. In bright sunlight,
this penalty increases to -4. Shadowpeople exposed to bright sun-
light become temporarily blinded after 2d6 turns of exposure.
The blindness lasts for a number of hours equal to the number of
turns spent outside.
Shadowperson

i. ime i =
- Qo oiCces—

 

Habitat/Society: Shadowpeople are most commonly found in
catacombs beneath large cities, or in dungeons and underground
reaches of vast, abandoned cities in the more desolate regions of
the world. One of the largest communities of shadowpeople is lo-
cated beneath the dark city of Sanction, a port in central Ansalon
on the northeastern shore of the New Sea. Surrounded by three
great volcanos, Sanction is an unappealing jumble of ware-
houses, brothels, slum dwellings, and slave markets. During the
War of the Lance, Sanction was a major stronghold of the forces
of evil; unknown to them, a tunnel system honeycombing the
land below the city provided a hiding place for a thriving commu-
nity of shadowpeople.

In Sanction, as in other populated areas near shadowpeople
communities, the existence of the race is the subject of rumors and
speculation. From time to time, a solitary explorer or an inquisi-
tive wizard may stumble on a community of shadowpeople, but
such intruders are usually sworn to secrecy or given potions to
erase their memories. So far, no one has revealed the existence of
the shadowpeople to the world at large-at least, no such stories
have yet been believed. Still, shadowpeople are occasionally seen
at night by children or the elderly; shadowpeople have a special
affinity for human children and senior citizens, and sometimes
engage in pleasant mental conversations with them at their bed-
sides.

Shadowpeople have a close, clannish culture. Mated shadow-
people have 1d4 offspring at a time, and the young are cared for
by whatever adults happen to be nearby. When young shadow-
people reach the age of ten, they are assigned to either the warrior
class or to the counselor class. These assignments are not arbi-
trary; they are made on the basis of the youngsters’ aptitudes and
interests.

The warriors patrol the underground tunnel network and de-
fend the clan against intrusion. The counselors make all of the ad-
ministrative decisions for the clan. One of the counselors is
elected to serve as king. The king makes the final decisions in in-
stances where the counselors are unable to reach a consensus. The
counselors also participate in a mindweave ritual similar to that
of the warriors to create the Revered Ancient One (see following!.

A typical settlement of shadowpeople is a labyrinth of subter-
ranean passages linking variouslysized natural caverns. Passages
leading to the main living areas are lined with traps. Intruders
stepping in the wrong place trigger two immense slabs of stone to
drop from the ceiling, completely blocking the passage. Trapped
intruders are telepathically examined by shadow warriors to de-
termine their motives. Intruders are required to agree to the terms
of the shadow warriors, or are left trapped between the slabs.

Personal residences are furnished simply, with stone furniture
and woven mats for sleeping. Each residence has three vents; one
vent leads to the surface to bring in fresh air, the second leads to
an underground stream to provide fresh water, and the third leads
to a bottomless passage or a lava stream for refuse disposal.
Other caverns are used for mushroom farms, conference rooms,
and recreational areas. The deepest and most inaccessible cavern

is reserved for the Revered Ancient One.

Shadowpeople do not collect treasure, but are fascinated by
art. Most cavern walls are decorated with elaborate drawings de-
picting scenes and heroes from the shadowpeople’s past. Shadow
watriors sometimes venture to the surface world to make oft with
an especially attractive sculpture or painting.

Ecology: Shadowpeople have no natural enemies, save for the
jarak-sinn, a race of savage lizard men who occasionally raid
shadowpeople settlements in an attempt to drive them from their
homes. Shadowpeople do not keep any domesticated animals.

Mushrooms and other fungi are dietary staples, supplemented
at times by insects and worms Shadowpeople do not engage in
trade.

Revered Ancient One

The Revered Ancient One is the manitestation of the mental ener-
gies of the shadowpeople counselors. When the counselors link
hands to form a large circle, then chant in unison and concentrate
for an hour, the Revered Ancient One appears. The amount of
time the Revered Ancient One remains conjured depends on the
number of counselors performing the mindweave ritual It four to
ten counselors perform the ritual, the Revered Ancient One ap-
pears for 1-2 hours. If 11 or more counselors perform the ritual,
the Revered Ancient One appears for 2d4 hours. Fewer than four
counselors cannot conjure the Revered Ancient One. Characters
of other races can participate in the mindweave ritual, but they
do not count as counselors when determining whether the Re-
vered Ancient One is conjured or how long it stays.

The Revered Ancient One has no physical properties or attrib-
utes. Its intelligence is always genius level, and it is always of neu-
tral good alignment. The Revered Ancient One can cast cure
serious wounds an unlimited number of times per day, providing
the recipient of the spell is brought to the Revered Ancient One’s
cavern (see below). The Revered Ancient One can also cast ftele-
port without error on anyone brought to its cavern the recipient
can be teleported to any location in the Prime Material plane,
providing he has been there before. Finally, the Revered Ancient
One can answer any question mentally posed by any of the coun-
selors who conjured it The Revered Ancient One answers these
questions with 95% accuracy: however, the Revered Ancient
One has no ability to foresee future events.

The Revered Ancient One usually resides in a sacred cavern ad-
jacent to the shadowpeople’s community. This cavern is always
blocked by a permanent wall of force that the Revered Ancient
One can negate at will, enabling it to decide who will pass
through. No light of any kind exists in the Revered Ancient Ones
cavern, even when it is not present: the darkness cannot be dis-
pelled by magical or any other means. The Revered Ancient One
communicates mentally, a character perceives its words as a
soothing voice, distant and echoed.
Shimmerweed

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate / Forest and plain
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Patch
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Moonlit nights
DIET: Special
INTELLIGENCE: Non- (0)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Nil

NO. APPEARING: 6-36

ARMOR CLASS: 8
MOVEMENT: Nil

HIT DICE: 1 hit point
THACO: Not applicable
NO. OF ATTACKS: Nil
DAMAGE/ATTACK: Nil

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Confusion
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: T (6” to 18” tall)
MORALE: Fearless (20)
XP VALUE: 35

Shimmerweed is a most unusual, and beautiful, variety of plant
that is found in temperate regions throughout the world. Al-
though it is wholly inoffensive and has few natural enemies,
shimmerweed can be one of the most dangerous things a party
encounters as it strolls through the wilds of Krynn.

Shimmerweed is a type of wildflower that grows in small
patches. Although on first inspection it looks much like a dande-
lion gone to seed, a closer look reveals that the plant consists of a
crystalline material much like fine spun glass. Its beautiful and
delicate appearance is enhanced by the way it catches rays of
moonlight and refracts them through its petals, unleashing a daz-
zling spray of brilliant colors on the area around it. An average
plant stands six to 18 inches tall.

Combat: Shimmerweed is unable to engage in any form of com-
bat. It cannot move, has no means of inflicting damage on oppo-
nents, and is so delicate that the slightest of attacks instantly
destroys it. Indeed, it has no motive at all to cause harm to other
living things, as it feeds on moonlight.

The defense mechanism a shimmerweed patch has is its daz-
zling light show When the moonlight that feeds the plant is
caught in its crystalline petals, it is enchanted and becomes so
brilliant as to affect all creatures who gaze upon it with a confu-
sion spell (as if cast by a 10th-level Red Robed wizard). The num-
ber of plants in the patch determines the effectiveness of this
defense mechanism, with each plant able to affect 1 Hit worth of
opponents. Thus a patch of 12 plants can bewilder up to 12 Hit
Dice of creatures.

Shimmerweed cannot tolerate bright sunlight on its delicate
petals, thus it opens only at night. Those who come across it by
day, in fact, are unlikely to take notice of the patch, for it looks
like nothing more than a grove of common weeds. The plant's
sensitivity to light is, however, a great weakness for it. Sudden
exposure to a bright light source, such as a continual light spell,
overloads its ability to draw nourishment with its petals, causing
it to instantly shatter into fine dust. A patch destroyed in this
manner is forever dead and cannot sprout again. Plants destroyed
by any other means grow back in about one month.

The dangerous thing about shimmerweed patches is that many
creatures use them to hunt prey. It is not uncommon for an intelli-

 

 

 

gent monster or animal to set its lair near a patch of shimmerweed
and wait for it to confuse travelers. Once the travelers are help-
less, these lurking hunters spring to the attack and slaughter their
prey.

Habitat/Society: Shimmerweed flowers are found in patches of
6d6 plants. Each patch grows from a single seedpod and all of the
plants in it are linked together beneath the surface by fine tendrils
that enable them to pool their stores of energy so that each may
teed equally.

Ecology: Shimmerweed is unique on the Prime Material plane

for its unusual crystalline structure and its ability to feed directly
on moonlight without use of photosynthesis.

As might be expected, a plant as unusual as this has a most in-
teresting means of reproduction. When a patch of shimmerweed
reaches full growth (36 plants that are 18 inches tall), it begins to
form a seedpod at its heart. The seedpod takes roughly 14 days to
form and, when complete, is a spherical, rainbow-hued crystal
roughly four inches in diameter. When fully formed and charged
with energy, the seedpod bursts with a flash of light and a loud
crack, sending fragments of itself as far as 15 yards from the par-
ent plant. Only the larger portions of the shattered pod (1d6 in
number) are viable and begin to grow. A patch of shimmerweed
grows from podlings to mature adults in about eight months. The
patch that spawned the seedpod withers and dies within days of
the pod’s explosion.

Shimmerweed seedpods are often used by wizards who are
crafting magical palantirs such as crystal balls or crystal hypnosis
balls. The petals of the flower, when ground into a fine sand, are
used in the creation of inks and other materials that relate to light
or hypnosis (such as a gem of brightness.)
Skrit

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Desert
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night
DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Animal (1)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1
ARMOR CLASS: 3
MOVEMENT: 15

HIT DICE: 6

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d3/1d3/1d6

SPECIAL ATTACKS:
SPECIAL DEFENSES:

Surprise, jellification
Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: L (7 long)
MORALE: 10

XP VALUE: 2,000

Skrits are carnivorous beetles that live in the cool deserts of Tala-
das. They are hulking creatures, approximately five to six feet in
height.

Similar in appearance to a flea, the skrit’s body is protected by
a rough, domed carapace. A host of short spiny legs protrude out
from under this shell. The head is small and can be retracted un-
der this shell, which tapers back to a narrow, inflexible tail. The
overall color of the shell is mottled black and brown, similar to
the surrounding terrain.

Combat: The skrit is a fierce predator, quick for its size. Too large
to effectively stalk prey, it relies on natural camouflage. It settles
among outcroppings of rock and waits unmoving for something
to pass close by. While the skrit can be spotted by those who look
for it, its camouflage works well enough to conceal it from casual
observation at distances beyond 15 feet. Closer than this and the
true nature of the “rock” is obvious to intelligent creatures who
happen to look that way. Those attacked by a skrit have a -1 pen-
alty applied to their surprise roll if the creature was not spotted.

In combat, the skrit picks out a single target (normally the
smallest or weakest looking of the player characters) and attacks
it almost to the exclusion of all others. it attacks with its two fee-
ble forelegs and its needlelike mouth. This mouth has retractable
barbs, so that once a hit is scored the probe stays in place. Each
turn thereafter, the skrit pumps a powerful enzyme into the vic-
tin’s bloodstream. At the same time, the creature attempts to
drag its victim to a sate place where it can eat its prey.

The enzyme has two effects. First it paralyzes the victim. The
victim must roll a saving throw vs. poison each round the skrit is
attached. A -1 penalty is applied to the saving throw for each
round after the first. The paralysis lasts for 3d6 hours or until the
enzyme is neutralized. Second , the enzyme also destroys cell tis-
sue, slowly dissolving the body to a soupy gelatinous mass. This

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

is what the skrit will later eat. This effect takes several hours. Vic-
tims are paralyzed by the time this occurs. The victim loses 10 hit
points per hour from the cell tissue destruction. The enzyme can
be halted with a neutralize posion spell. Damage from the bite
and claws can be healed normally or through spells Damage
caused by the enzyme can only be healed normally or through re-
generation.

Habitat/Society: Skrits are solitary hunters with a limited range
They do not make lairs, but inhabit patches of rough ground
where their camouflage is most effective Within this territory,
skrits change hunting locations from day to day, depending on
the amount of success.

Skrits have both male and female genders, distmguished only
by the length of their tails. During the mating season in early
spring, the female sends signals to the males by clattering its tail
against the rocks. The males gather and combat for the right to be
her mate. This is a particularly dangerous time to be among the
rocks, for the males will attack anything that moves ( + 1 bonus to
attack and damage rolls).

Ecology: The skrit is an essential part of the desert ecological

chain. Not only is it an important predator, but after death its
body plays a role in the life of the desert dwellers. The huge cara-
pace becomes home for many creatures, most of these arc benign
or at least of no great threat to adventurers. Sometimes however,
the shells are taken over by huge colonies of ants The domed
shell becomes the home to a ferocious swarm, quite dangerous to
disturb.

The shell can also be fashioned into an excellent armor by those
skilled in handling the peculiar material. Skilled craftsmen use the
carapace to fashion breastplates and other solid pieces of armor
A suit fashioned from this material has AC 4.

 
Spectral Minion

& oo

— op Ht,
—— Ragen NCC

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any 2
FREQUENCY: Very rare Aa
ORGANIZATION: Varies oS
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any = *
DIET: Nil Nita st |
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10) ua} WN .
TREASURE: Nil . ew os ee
ALIGNMENT: Varies .a Aye ge
tt ik SS SSIS oa =, |
: n 1 mh , = SS uo |
NO. APPEARING: 1-20 or more ‘ * . ‘e oe ohhh * SS oe
ARMOR CLASS: 2 wets : ec A ea Ss a * x
MOVEMENT: 30 vay a Se NS, ~.
HIT DICE: Varies sete * wee Gg SS a — SO
THACO: Varies vate ~ et : os _|QAY |
NO. OF ATTACKS: 0, 1, or 2 NSS tS + oe AS ‘ |
DAMAGE/ATTACK: Varies RRS SS ee WSN SS
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below ef SF SN SN Ose aS SS
SPECIAL DEFENSES: +1 or better to hit ee te Sa a ee 8 SSN —
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 20% TES ts Se we eS SS ms
SIZE: M (5’-7’ tall) ANS SAE a 2 S88 . 3 |
MORALE: Elite (13) ee = en y oF SESES SE |
XP VALUE: Philosopher: 975 a ‘ ne SS 2 AWGN * ‘
Reveler: 975 aa a SV oe XG a
Searcher. 975 Ic SA A Tah SANS at |
Guardian: 1,400 7

Warrior. 1,400
Berserker: 1,400

Spectral minions are the spirits of humans or demihumans who
died before they could fulfill their vows. Even in death, spectral
minions are bound to the vows or quests placed upon them while
they were alive

Spectral minions appear as they were in life, except that they
are nearly transparent. Like ghosts, spectral minions do not fully
exist on the Prime Material plane. Spectral minions retain the Hit
Dice, attack, damage ratings, alignment, and language of their
former selves. Regardless of their intelligence in their previous

lives, all spectral minions are average intelligence. They retain

some but not necessarily all of the memories of their original
forms, as spectral miruons, their uncompleted quests and vows
dominate their minds. All spectral minions have a movement rate
of 30.

There are six general types of spectral minions: berserkers,
guardians, philosophers, revelers, searchers, and warriors. The
types cannot be distinguished by appearance, but their attitudes

and behavior are quite different, as detailed in the description of
each type.

Combat: Spectral minions can inflict damage only if they died
holding weapons. Such weapons become a part of their spectral
forms. Long swords are the most typical, but daggers, bows,
staves, and other melee weapons are also common. These weap-
ons inflict the same amount of damage as they would if wielded
by living creatures. Since their weapons are part of them, spectral
minions cannot be disarmed.

The speed of spectral minions gives them a -1 bonus to all ini-
tiative rolls. They can be hit only by +1 or better weapons.
Though spectral minions cannot use magic themselves, they are
20% magic resistant.

If a spectral minion is destroyed, or if its vows or quests are ful-
filled, the spectral minion (and its weapon) disappears forever.
This also occurs if remove curse or a similar spell is cast upon it. A
spectral minion cannot be turned

Certain types of spectral minions have special attacks These
are explained in the individual listings.

 

Habitat/Society: Spectral minions are cursed to relive the
events leading to their death, endlessly trying to fulfill their vows.
Outdoors, they must stay within 1,000 yards of where they died.
Indoors, they must stay in the corridor or room where they lost
their lives. On very rare occasions where a quest required them to

perform an act over a wide area, they are tree to roam within that
area.

Ecology: Spectral minions do not age, nor do they perform any
physiological functions; though they may appear to be eating or
drinking, these actions have no meaningful effects.

Berserkers: Some spectral minions become overwhelmed by de-
spair. Losing all hope of ever being freed from their charge, these
minions are eventually driven into a berkserking frenzy. Others
become mindless killers as soon as they become minions because
of an unresolved obsession in their former lives; for instance, a
spectral minion cook might become a berserker because someone
in the past criticized his cooking and was no longer around to
apologize for the remark

All berserker spectral minions are of chaotic evil alignment.
They fanatically attack any intruders who stumble into their ter-
ritory. They refuse to parley and pursue intruders as far as possi-
ble. All berserker spectral minions are armed and gain a + 1
bonus to their attack and damage rolls. Additionally, berserkers
can make two attacks per round, they are the only spectral min-
ions with this ability.

In all cases, berserker spectral minions have rebelled against
their quests and have no hope of ever being freed from their
charges. Even if a sympathetic character is able to discover the
nature of a berserker minion’s unfulfilled quest, resolving it will
not cause the spectral minion to disappear; in the case of the spec-
tral minion cook, finding the poor soul who insulted him in his
former life and forcing him to apologize will not cause the minion
to vanish. Berserker spectral minions can only be vanquished if

they are destroyed or if remove curse or a similar spell is cast
upon them

Guardians: These spectral minions were quested to defend a
room, a passage, or an object. In most cases, they served as
Spectral Minion

chai "7 =
—PRagonjance-—"

 

guards for some important location and died at their posts.

Guardian spectral minions are freed from their confinement it
they successfully defend their posts against intruders for 100
years and a day, or complete some other assigned task.

Occasionally, guardians respond to a password or signal, al-
lowing characters to pass safely.

All guardians are armed and are usually of chaotic or neutral
good alignment. They defend themselves if attacked or if their
post is threatened, but otherwise they are not particularly hostile.
More than anything, guardian spectral minions want to be re-
leased from their vows and to be freed of their responsibilities.

The following are some examples of guardian spectral minions:

* A guardian is assigned to watch over the coffins of a royal
family in a sealed tomb. He is so weary of his eternal duty that he
speaks openly to any intruders who treat him kindly. If an in-
truder tells him that he is relieved of his duty-regardless of
whether the intruder has any actual authority to do so-the
guardian is released from his vow and disappears.

* A guardian floats above a large golden chair in an otherwise
empty room. It is his responsibility to guard the chair from in-
truders. If an intruder speaks the password “persevere,” the min-
ion is released from his vows and free of his responsibilities.
Characters can pass through the room unharmed, so long as they
do not approach the chair. If an intruder does not speak the pass-
word, the guardian attacks until the intruder leaves. The guard-
ian is released from his vows after he has guarded the chair for
100 years and a day.

* A guardian sits behind a marble counter in a dusty room. He
is required to collect a visitor’s tax from all intruders. if the in-
truder pays the tax, the guardian allows him to pass; if not, the
guardian attacks him. When the guardian has spent 100 years and
a day collecting taxes, he is released from his vows.

Philosophers: Philosophers are spectral minions who spend
their time in study and contemplation, usually in libraries or mu-
seums. They are extremely knowledgeable. If given the chance,
they talk at great length about subjects that interest them.

Philosophers can be of any alignment. Often they arc found in
groups of two or more engaged in heated debate; it is their curse
to endlessly discuss philosophic issues left unresolved in their
former lives. philosophers usually do not tolerate interruptions,
but they have been known to ask intruders for their opinions
about an issue under discussion. They attack only if their honesty
is questioned or if they have to defend themselves.

A party may sometimes encounter a group of spectral minions
hovering off the ground about 1d4 + 1 feet. These are philosopher
minions lost deep in thought. The floating philosophers often in-
vite questions from an intruder. With each response, the philoso-
phers drop a foot closer to the ground. If the philosophers reach
the ground, they become enraged that the intruder has asked too
many questions, then summon help, usually 1d8 warrior minions
from an adjacent area.

Similarly, a group of philosophers may be encountered floating
several feet off the ground while involved in an animated discus-
sion. They, too, invite questions from an intruder. However,
when one philosopher has given his response, one of the others
totally disagrees, triggering a pointless argument that continues
for 1d6 rounds with half of the minions taking one side and half
taking the other. As before, the minions drop a foot closer to the
ground with each response, but in this case, the entire group dis-
appears as soon as one of them touches the ground.

Revelers: These minions arc cursed to celebrate madly for all

eternity. When encountered, they are engaged in one of the fol-
lowing activities:

* Frenzied dancing

* Drinking spectral ale or wine

* Chasing members of the opposite sex
* Playing musical instruments

* Dining gluttonously

Reveler spectral minions arc chaotic evil. Though unarmed,
they can be quite dangerous. Any character seen by the revelers
may be surrounded by them, if they’ re looking for more guests
for their party as determined by the DM). The revelers beckon to
the character, laughing and shrieking, urging him to join their
fun. If the character joins the revelers for da least three consecu-
tive rounds, he must roll a successful saving throw vs. spell to re-
sist them. It the character successfully resists them, the revelers
ignore the character and resume their frolicking.

If the character fails the saving throw, he immediately slumps
to the floor in a deep sleep. The affected character cannot be
awakened by dispel magic or by any other magic short of a wish.
While asleep, the character’s spirit essence visibly leaves his body
to join the minions in their revelry. Meanwhile, the character
loses one level of experience for every turn his essence is engaged
in revelry with the minions. If all of the revelers (except the char-
acter) are slain, the character revives; lost experience is regained
at the rate of one level per four hours after the character awakens.
Some revelers may even trap the character forever unless rescued,
but such situations are rare.

If the revelers have no interest in inviting intruders to their
party, they surround any intruders who provoke them as de-
scribed above; if the intruders remain in the room with the revel-
ers for three consecutive rounds, they must roll successful saving
throws to resist falling asleep and losing experience levels.

Searchers: Searchers arc spectral minions that stalk endlessly
through their territory, searching for a particular object to fulfill
their quest. These creatures were questing when they died in their
original forms, and usually the object of the quest is not t
found within he searcher’s range Only if someone brings the ob-
ject of the search to the minion can the creature’s spirit be freed.

All searchers are armed and are usually lawful evil in ailgn-
ment. They are very dangerous, for they destroy anything that
stands between them and their unreachable goals.

Warriors: These minions are the spirits of mortals who were

locked in combat at the time of death, usually soldiers who died
in bloody battles. Groups of 100 or more warrior spectral min-
ions are typically encountered on a battlefield, including fighters
of differing alignments from both sides or a battle.

Warrior minions are always armed and fight each other con-
stantly. However, in all cases, the minion-versus-minion combat
produces no lasting damage, and the net effect is an eternal con-
flict between the groups. Only through the intervention of mor-
tals can the tide of battle be turned in favor of one side or the
other. Typically, characters of good alignment are approached by
the leader of the good spectral minion warriors, who tries to con-
vince them to join his side in an upcoming battle the good minion
leader promises to help them, usually by supplying needed infor-
mation, if good triumphs over evil.Usually, the characters need
to slay at least 80% of the evil minion forces to win the battle. If
the battle is won, the evil warriors disappear and the good war-
riors respond with a victory shout. After the good leader helps
the characters as promised, he and the other good minions disap-
pear, at last released from their quest.
Spider (of Krynn)

—aRagoni CCE a =

=

 

 

Whisper Spider

Giant Trap Door

 

Spider
CLIMATE/ Tropical, subtropical, Tropical, subtropi-
TERRAIN: and temperate/Plain, cal, and temperate/
forest, hill, moun Plain, forest, and
tam, and jungle jungle
FREQUENCY: Very rare Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Family Family
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any
DIET: Carnivore Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7) Animal (1)
TREASURE: Cc Cc
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil Nil
ARMOR CLASS: 4 4
MOVEMENT: 9, Wb 12 3, Wb 12
HIT DICE: 8+8 4+4
THACO: 11 15
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-12 2-8

SPECIAL ATTACKS:

Webs, poison

Webs, poison

SPECIAL

DEFENSES: Jumps Nil
MAGIC

RESISTANCE: Nil Nil

SIZE: H (15’ long) L (8’ long)
MORALE: Elite (14) Average (9)
XP VALUE: 1,400 420

Whisper Spider

The whisper spider has a plump abdomen, multiple eyes, and
four pairs of segmented legs Its body is covered with short, black
bristles. Two gray stripes run the length of its back. Its eyes are
bright red The whisper spider moves quite rapidly on its webs
and can also make six-foot leaps in any direction.

Combat: The whisper spider uses lures and misdirection to cap-
ture prey It can create a false spider, a flapping banner, a filmy
barrier to hide behind, or any other shape it has seen. It creates
ten-foot-square web sheets to trap prey and gain a better chance
to inflict a killing bite. It also shoots web strands up to two feet
away to bind foes (treat as if the target is AC 10), though it cannot
make a melee attack in the same round it shoots webbing. A vic-
tim in contact with a web must roll a saving throw vs. wand; if he
fails, he is stuck fast as if caught in a web spell.

If a whisper spider makes a successful bite attack, the victim
must roll a saving throw vs. poison with a -2 penalty. It the roll
fails, the victim tails into a stupor for 2d4 turns, the victim can
take no actions until the poison wears off.

A whisper spider can flatten itself against the ground and be-
come 80% undetectable. It moves so silently that opponents have
a -5 penalty to their surprise rolls.

Habitat/Society: The whisper spider’s lair is a large web, usually
concealed in tree branches or inside a cave. It keeps treasure items
taken from consumed victims in a hole in the ground near its web,
or in hollow trees

The females of both species eat their mates 50% of the time; the
more fortunate males are able to scramble to safety. Females lay
about 100 eggs at once, but fewer than 20% actually hatch. The
whisper spider keeps her babies on her back until they mature, a
period of about three to four months.

Ecology: Most predators avoid these dangerous spiders, though
spider babies are eaten by birds, frogs, bats, and small mammals.

 

 

 

 

Giant snakes sometimes eat adult spiders.

Both spider species eat any warm-blooded creature they can
ensnare. Favorites include monkeys, wild boars, herd animals
and humans.

Giant Trap Door Spider

Like the whisper spider, the trap door spider has a plump abdo-
men, multiple eyes, and four pairs of segmented legs. Its body is
covered with long, silky hairs, either brown or gold in color. Its
legs are banded with red stripes.

Combat: The trap door spider lives at the bottom of a deep tun-
nel. It covers the entrance to the tunnel with a door of sticks,
weeds, webbing, and mud, then waits at the bottom for victims.
The spider can detect the vibrations of approaching creatures up
to 50 yards away. When a victim comes within ten feet of the trap
door, the spider scrambles out of the tunnel and attacks. Because
the spider moves quickly and silently, the intended victim has a -5
penalty to his surprise roll. The spider attempts to grab its victim
by making a normal attack roil; if successful, the spider drags the
victim back into the tunnel and starts to eat him. A grabbed vic-
tim can free himself with a successful Strength check (with a -2
penalty). At least two characters whose Strength totals 20 or
more can wrench a companion loose. While the spider has a hold
on a victim, it can make no other attacks.

If a trap door spider makes a successful bite attack, the victim
must roll a successful saving throw vs. poison or suffer an addi-
tional 1d6 points of damage. The trap door spider can shoot web
strands up to three feet away.

Habitat/Society: Trap door spiders live in their underground
tunnels. A tunnel is usually about ten feet in diameter and can be
as much as 100 feet deep. The bottom of the tunnel sometimes
contains two chambers, the second used to store treasure items.

The female trap door spider creates a silken web sack on the
side of the tunnel to hold her eggs. When the eggs hatch, the
young spiders crawl from the tunnel to make their own way in the
world.

Ecology: See above.
Stag

‘ pi ge Nance

 

 

 

 

 

Wild Stage Giant Stag The White Stag

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate/Forest, plain, hill,
and mountain

FREQUENCY: Common Rare Unique
ORGANIZATION: Herd Solitary Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day Day Any
DIET: Herbivore Herbivore Herbivore
INTELLIGENCE: Animal (1) Animal (1) Highly (13-14)
TREASURE: Nil Nil Nil
ALIGNMENT: Nil Nil Lawful good
NO. APPEARING: 1-4 1-2 1
ARMOR CLASS: 7 -5
MOVEMENT: 24 24
HIT DICE: 3 10
THACO: 17 15 11
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 or 2 1 or 2 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-3/1-3 or 2-8 1-4/1-4 or 4-16 1-12/1-6/1-6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil Nil Nil
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil Nil See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil Nil Nil
SIZE: M (4’-5’ tall, excluding antlers) L (7 + tall, excluding antlers) M (7’ tall, excluding antlers)
MORALE: Unsteady (7) Unsteady (7) Champion (16)
XP VALUE: 65 175 2,000

Wild stags are the aggressive males of a deer herd.

Wild stags have reddish-brown or light gray coats in the sum-
mer, turning dark in the winter. The bottoms of their tails are
white. when running, their tails straighten to reveal these white
areas. Their long, powerful legs end in sharp hooves. They have
tapered heads with sensitive noses, huge dark eyes, and large ears
that are capable of moving in any direction to pick up sounds.

Stags have two branching antlers growing from the top of their
skulls Stag antlers are hard and bony, covered with a velvety
fuzz The antlers are primarily used as a symbol of leadership, but
are also used when dueling for mates or fighting off enemies.
Some stags living in colder climates shed their antlers in the
winter, growing new ones the following spring.

Combat: Normally, wild stags are docile and passive, but when
challenged, they defend their herds against all but the most fear-
some opponents. A stag usually attacks by charging head down,
butting opponents with his antlers. He can also attack by lashing
out with his sharp fore hooves His antler attack inflicts 2d4
points of damage, while his fore hooves inflict 1d3 points of dam-
age each.

Habitat/Society: Stags are found
meadows in all parts of Krynn. They have no permanent lairs,
grazing from field to field in search of food or to avoid predators.
Though some migrate for hundreds of miles, most herds remain
in the same general area throughout their lives. They spend their
days foraging for food and basking in the sun, and their nights
sleeping among bushes or tall grasses. For each wild stag in a
herd, there are 2d4 fawns and does. A doe gives birth to one or
two fawns in a secluded area; the fawns remain hidden until they
are old enough to run with the herd.

in temperate forests and

Ecology: Stags eat grams, fruits, seeds, and twigs. They are of-
ten the victims of wolves, hunters, and other predators. Wild
stags are domesticated by Kagonesti elves who use them as
mounts. The gods of good use the white stag to guide or otherwise
assist favored characters.

Giant Stags

Giant stags are larger versions of wild stags, often topping seven
feet in height and weighing in excess of 1,500 pounds A giant
stags antler attack inflicts 4d4 points of damage, while his fore
hooves inflict 1d4 points of damage each Otherwise, the giant
stag conforms to the general characteristics of the wild stag.

The White Stag

The white stag is an enchanted wild stag chosen by the gods of
good to serve as their messenger. The white stag resembles a giant
stag, but its coat is pure white. At night, its coat radiates a soft
glow of white light. When angered, its eyes burn fiery red. The
white stag can communicate telepathically; it only communicates
with creatures of good alignment, however.

The white stag makes attacks similar to those of the wild stag,
though its superior strength and size enables it to inflict signifi-
cantly more damage. Additionally, the white stag has special abil-
ities that it uses to assist creatures of good alignment. It can cast
find the path at will; it uses this ability to help friendly characters
avoid dangers or to show them the most direct routes to their des-
tinations. The white stag can also cast speak with animal at will
to learn information that it sometimes telepathically passes along
to befriended creatures. Finally, the white stag has the ability to
cast a bless spell three times per day. The white stag has habits
similar to those of the wild stag, but he is often active at night,
sleeping during the day.

The white stag cannot be captured: if necessary, it fights to the
death. If the white stag is killed, its body immediately disappears.
Dark thunderclouds form over the heads of the killers, hovering
there for the next seven days. During that time, the killers must
add +1 to their Armor Class.
Tayling

 

 

 

Tayling Tayland
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical/ Island Tropical/Island
FREQUENCY: Very rare Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary or small

Villages
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day Any
DIET: Herbivore Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12) Average (8-10)
TREASURE: K Xd
ALIGNMENT: Neutral good Chaotic neutral

 

NO. APPEARING: 1 or 10-100 1 or 10-100
ARMOR CLASS: 10 (8) 6

MOVEMENT: 12 15

HIT DICE: 4 8

THACO: 17 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4 1-8/1-8/2-12 +2
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spells Killing rage

SPECIAL DEFENSES:

Immune to all
Enchantment /
Charm spells

Immune to all
Charm sphere
priest spells

MAGIC

RESISTANCE: 10% Nil

SIZE: M (5’ tall) M (7’ tall)
MORALE: Steady (11) Average (9)
XP VALUE: 2,000 1,400

 

Inhabiting an isolated jungle island in the middle of the Courrain
Ocean, the taylings are a race of intelligent humanoids. Every
birth results in twins, one bestial (taylang) and the other demihu-
man (tayling). The minds of the twins are telepathically linked,
sharing each other’s thoughts, emotions, and experiences as if
they inhabited the others body.

From the moment of birth, the twins cannot bear to be apart
and are never voluntarily separated by more than a mile, which is
the limit of their telepathic connection. If a separation does occur,
the tayling becomes anxious and irrational, fearing something
has happened to his twin, while the taylang simply becomes vi-
cious, attacking anything in sight. Even after being reunited, the
twins are seldom the same after such an experience. The tayling
usually becomes unbalanced and paranoid, and is apt to accuse
friends and acquaintances of plotting to cause him harm. The tay-
lang grows unpredictable and violent, behaving affectionately
one moment and attacking to kill in the next. Should the pair re-
main separated for a fortnight or more the tayling stops eating
and wastes away. The taylang usually kills itself by attacking
some creature of great power.

Though always vaguely human in form, the taylang may re-
semble any sort of woodland creature from a great bear to a
slinky reptile. It is usually large, in the neighborhood of seven fret
tall, and quite husky. In contrast, the tayling is rather small, with
alabaster skin, a delicate frame, and possessed of fine features re-
sembling those of an eif.

Combat: In combat, the twins make an efficient fighting ma-
chine. With his great strength and speed the brutish taylang is a
natural fighter and warrior. On the other hand, the intelligent
tayling is a cunning tactician and natural spellcaster. Given these
complementary abilities and the capability of coordinating strat-
egy telepathically, it is little wonder that these creatures receive
several benefits in battle.

First, due to their telepathic connection, the twins receive two
initiative benefits: They are surprised only on a roll of 1, and they
receive a -1 bonus to their initiative roll each round. Second, they
have a 75% chance of recognizing enemy spellcasters before the

 

 

wo 4 i ;
ei i 3 |

 

battle begins, and they receive a +1 bonus to their saving throws.
Third, because the tayling telepathically knows the taylang’s con-
dition at all times, the tayling can sometimes prevent his twin
from falling unconscious or dead, even after the taylang’s hit
points have fallen below 0. If the tayling possesses any means of
healing his twin, such as spells, potions, or similar capabilities, he
can use his next action to heal the taylang. Assuming the results
restore the taylang to positive hit points, it is treated as if it had
never died-no system shock or resurrection survival roll is
needed.

During the battle itself, the most common tactic for tayling
twins is for the taylang to hold the opponent at bay while the tay-
ling uses spells to ensure a combat advantage. Taylings can cast
spells either as wizards or priests varying in levels from 1-10. Wiz-
ards always choose their spells from the Alteration school, and
priests only have major access to the Elemental sphere.

After the tayling casts his spells, the taylang then closes in to
finish the job, supported by the tayling’s spells, or by physical at-
tacks if need be.

Should one of the twins perish in battle, the survivor immedi-
ately loses its initiative and saving throw bonuses. However, the
survivor enters a maniacal state of mind and attacks without re-
gard to its own safety. For the tayling, this means casting the most
destructive spells it knows, without regard to personal safety,
then attacking hand-to-hand. The taylang enters a killing rage,
during which it receives a +3 bonus to its attack roll, can keep at-
tacking until reaching -20 hit points, and shrugs off all effects of
magic. For example, if the tayling twin is killed during round two
of battle, and an enemy mage casts a color spray on the taylang at
the beginning of round three, the taylang ignores the effects of the
spell.

As outlined above, a lone tayling twin that survives a battle
soon perishes. For this reason, it is exceptionally difficult to make
tayling twins flee combat. Neither twin flees unless the other is
also fleeing. In effect, both twins must decide to flee ‘before either
leaves.

For this same reason, a surviving tayling twin never forgives its
twin’s killers. Should a party flee after killing a twin, the other
hunts the party down and mercilessly attempts to slay every per-
son involved in the twin’s death.
Tayling

— / E iyo Ni}. IC

 

Among the taylings, war is unknown, for their villages have al-
ways co-existed peacefully. Should organized combat become
necessary, however, it is extremely doubtful that they could adapt
to the rigid structure and discipline required to forge a successful
army. It seems most likely that they would use the rugged jungle
terrain of their island home to engage in guerilla warfare.

Habitat/Society: The tayling species inhabits an isolated jungle
island located far out in the Courrain Ocean, and remain bliss-
fully unaware of the violent forces shaping the rest of Krynn.
Their island, which they simply call Land, is the result of a large
volcanic upthrust. At its center rises a huge, still-active volcano
that sends a constant plume of steam and smoke into the atmos-
phere. From a distance, this makes Land appear to be nothing
more than a cumulus cloud. (Perhaps this accounts for the fact
that it remains undiscovered and uncharted even today.) The
flanks of the volcano, which the taylings call Pillar-That-Holds-
The-Sky, are covered with dense fields of ice. These glaciers are
the source of the cool streams that keep Land watered and lush.

At sea level, Land is a jungle paradise, populated with all man-
ner of beasts and plant. Food is plentiful and the weather is mod-
erate, so the taylings living here experience little strife, other than
occasionally falling prey to the ferocious animals that roam the
jungle. As one might expect, those living at sea level tend to view
life as a merry party.

Higher up Pillar-That-Holds-The-Sky’s slopes, life is not so
pleasant. Here, the weather is colder and the land more barren, so
those who choose to abide here have developed a harsher outlook
on life and tend to be harder workers than their low-elevation fel-
lows. The taylings here must work harder to raise their crops in
narrow terraces built into the flanks of Pillar-That-Holds-The-
Sky, and the taylangs must spend more time and trouble hunting.
They regard low-elevation taylings and taylangs as lazy no-goods
who would rather sleep all day than do any work. (Their low-
elevation cousins find this rather amusing. They cannot under-
stand what possesses their relations to live at high altitude and
waste all their time trying to scratch a living out of the volcano’s
flanks. At the base of the Pillar there is plenty of everything just
for the taking.)

At both high and low elevations, the taylings live in individual
huts in villages. The taylangs lead a more feral existence, prowl-
ing around the outskirts and hunting by night. Needless to say, it
is very difficult to sneak up on a tayling village.

Not surprisingly, both the high-altitude and low-altitude tay-
lings view the Pillar-That-Holds-The-Sky as the ultimate deity.
They attribute it with making the land upon which they live,

bringing forth the plants they eat, and spewing up the air which
they breathe. Therefore, the low- and high-elevation taylings co-
operate in maintaining a small monastery at the icy summit. It is
the duty of the priests who reside here to constantly express the
gratitude of the tayling people. In return, the rest of the tayimg
population supplies the monastery with food, clothing, and other
necessities.

The monastery sends a priest to each village to act as the local
spiritual guide and counselor. At the high elevations, this priest
serves the function of a chief and has authority over all aspects of
community life, from planting to procreation. Priests serving in
low-elevation villages, however, are seen as little more than party
organizers for the many festivals of celebration.

At both low and high elevations, procreation is one of the more
complicated aspects of tayling life. Like everything else in life, the
twins must make their choices together, and must select another
pair of twins as mates. Because the twins can be any mix of sexes
(both female, female taylang and male tayling, male taylang and
female tayling, or both male), finding a compatible set of twins
can be quite difficult. The taylang twin must make his /her selec-
tion first, as the differences in taylang forms can limit his /her
range of mates. The tayling twin then investigates the other pair’s
tayling and, ideally, finds that the tayling is of the correct sex and
attractive. When these arrangements are finally completed, both
twins mate with their counterparts in the opposite pair.

No permanent bonds are formed between pairs of twins for no
attachment could possibly be as great as that between the twins
themselves. After the mating, the twin pairs part ways. A year
later, the females give birth to a set of twins. The twins are raised
by their mothers, with only occasional and accidental contact
with their fathers. If a pair of twins is unlucky enough to consist
of two males, it never enjoys the privilege of raising children.

Ecology: Taylangs subsist soiely on a diet of fresh meat, which
they take great pleasure in hunting. Taylmgs are vegetarians At
low elevations, they meet their needs solely by gathering wild
fruit, nuts, berries, and etc. At high elevations, they spend In-
credible amounts of effort and energy farming the grams that
form the staples of their diet. When great strength is needed, such
as during plowing, they often enlist the reluctant help of their tay-
lang siblings.
Thanoi (Walrus Man)

 

eemvargrennam Ancnean AL and ann

Sueantzation- _—

Perttucence tren

Dawacwarrack €5/'¢8 wast ot by waspon
12 bom to devaee

Se tis um

donate Bree

ra and alos cee pte a Sem grst tl hey ca ma
lege ae) eae much Ye waar They fave Fuge aed fst
bbe te ep fm fiom They five Ranked es an Ber tt
“han boiter te prod by tmgh efiry sh dark gy
Lnbough ther cae ne comply covered by ake fae heat
‘Thana hive bo vee nec we cone af hen fc Th
jee ate cmall and de ually Buck ar dep Uh coer They
Fave wide owt ft Ber pe ad aera lt sth hon
ond such bans Aor of ctan tata be te it
By modited tenor ‘tndng fam fhe cater per Tae at
Female ano are na epwieeny dere appearance
Mout tre eat lng and fer bude oe sighdy has it the
ik tn er ddr of gy ana
canary efor dearanan Temas sonatas est shart
{Bhed by crovie of bane url made fom feh rpm All

   

‘hp
ees seal ellen
Sano nove ‘a ty oman seg a wadabg
ee : fe ee Tey se te Tal en Sate
Gin fel ssa ing. aha her emg agen
Sa The Spatan Srards ane surplesamed oy no vers]
coe “ea a ee ere ih hye a

ice ty retard og ed orb het
Sie Erica advange at thor soy fe mancuer ah ve ad
son and tet arb pga fom bs wht

Tecuse af than soangty any weap aed by 2 hana dows 2
Mie furan nnd oe tae wes of nade by Tes a oe
Sreapane) ‘Thamar consmact surdy farpoone from wasn
Thanoi (Walrus Man)

 

 

points of damage (only the thanoi receive this bonus, thanks to
their special hurling technique).

Thanoi hands are not flexible, preventing the use of bows and
similar weapons. However, a thanoi’s tusks are extremely effec-
tive in melee. Instead of using a weapon, a thanoi can make two
tusk attacks against the same opponent, causing 2d4 points of
damage with each tusk.

Thanoi do not wear armor. Not only do their tough hides pro-
vide armorlike protection, the bulky thanoi find artificial armor
extremely uncomfortable.

Thanoi are immune to all forms of cold, both natural and magi-
cal, but this immunity has its disadvantages. They suffer 1 extra
point of damage per die from any fire-based attacks, whether
magical or nonmagical. Additionally, thanoi may suffer damage
if exposed to climates above freezing. In climates with average
temperatures between 32° and 40° F, thanoi feel discomfort. For
every week in an environment with average temperatures higher
than 40° F, thanoi lose 1d4 + 1 hit points.

Habitat/Society: The thanoi are not known for their intelli-
gence. They are hostile and suspicious toward strangers, though
they are cordial to other thanoi tribes and cooperative with evil
races with whom they share common goals.

Thanoi kill for the sheer joy of it. They are fiercely territorial,
and they mercilessly slaughter trespassers. They also engage in
recreational killing of animals, the more helpless, the better; a
band of thanoi would not, for instance, attack a dragon, but they
would relish the opportunity to massacre a family of seals.

Thanoi live only in regions of extreme cold. Most live on ocean
shores, but some tribes make their homes on drifting glaciers.
Thanoi have no permanent settlements, relocating when they
have exhausted the hunting and fishing in a particular area.

Several families live together to form a tribe. An average fam-
ily consists of a mated pair and one or two offspring. The entire
tribe comprises about 20 members, equally divided between
males and females. Females give birth to one or two babies every
two years. A young thanoi grows to maturity in about 20 years;
immature thanoi (ages 2-20) cannot use weapons, but can make
tusk attacks causing 1d4 points of damage each. An immature
thanoi has 2 Hit Dice. Thanoi have a life span of about 60 years.

Thanoi homes are constructed from blocks of ice shaped to the
desired size with their tusks. Pots of burning oil furnish light. A
hole in the ceiling provides ventilation.

A tribe of thanoi always has a leader. This leader is usually the
meanest and most aggressive male and must be at least 30 years
old. The leader always has at least 5 Hit Dice. All decisions for the
tribe are made by the leader. A leader picks another aggressive
tribesman to serve as his deputy; in case of the leader’s death, the
deputy assumes leadership. If the tribe runs out of eligible mem-
bers to serve as leaders, they are absorbed into another tribe.

The eldest female of a tribe serves as its medicine woman,
called the kagog. The kagog can cast cure serious wounds and
predict weather, each three times per day (predict weather en-
ables the kagog to know the weather for the next 24 hours within
a 30-mile radius; the spell is 90% accurate). Knowledge of these
spells is passed from kagog to kagog; as in the case of the leader,
the kagog chooses and trains her own successor.

Thanoi collect treasure Items, although not for their monetary
value They mainly use the shiny coins and gems for good luck
charms and fishing lures.

Thanoi often tame and tram ice bears as tracking animals.
They sometimes use the ice bears to pull massive sleds over the
snow; a typical sled holds a dozen thanoi and is pulled by a team
of two ice bears. The sleds are made of wood and bone, thanoi
coat the runners with fish fat or seal blubber for maximum speed.

Thanoi sometimes carry pots of oil (specially distilled from de-
posits found on the ocean floor) and pouches of burning embers
with them on the sleds. The oil pots are ignited, then tossed on en-
emies. This is a particularly effective tactic when attempting to
disable vehicles, such as the iceboats of the Ice Folk Thanoi can
also ride bareback on icebears; this is helpful when the thanoi
need to cross an area of deep, soft snow, since the bears can easily
traverse the largest drifts.

Ecology: Thanoi can sometimes be convinced to ally with evil

races; however, thanoi are too independent-minded to form last-
ing alliances. They have strong relationships with the ice bears.
ice bears are used as hunting partners and also as allies against
common enemies. Thanoi hunting parties often prowl glacial ar-
eas looking for the hated Ice Folk, with whom they have violent,
unending territorial disputes. Ice Folk hunt thanoi for their blub-
ber, their hides (from which they make warm clothing), and their
tusks (from which they make jewelry and weapons).

Aside from their weapons, thanoi produce no items of value
and, priding themselves on their self-reliance, never engage in
trade. However, thanoi-constructed weapons are highly sought
collector’s items, particularly thanoi harpoons.

Thanoi primarily eat the fish that are trapped in the ice-covered
lakes in their domains. They also enjoy the flesh of seals, whales,
and sea birds. They are not above eating carrion. Thanoi always
eat their meat raw.
Tylor

 

ccunwaregreneay any
renguese'r a

fereuuicence Serr a

Daw acuarrsek {poh 20 eer
sronaue Fro me et

ge Huis sods ish Tall 9s
ase ase wile
Sison fat sai
2 ey yone os =
3g aan Soto prs

yea huge land diag ho wemge Thy ae az oe
Pode of su dagre ming wh fae Hy ha te

Combat Athough stays pessamg pawel afinene
tyeTh las love a deaioy thet poy wih bee ad 08 ches
Pe ee gtr ay orp pons fr pgs
bg cote oa mt pro ob mc ee

ath Weapanpeclel Abllise A yar whorls mane of the
Sneed teen, hae rant one ee

 

rath vicapon_Spale wzanfrkst gin xe value
aa wi See
Mi 1 kato
Ni wh Te eso
Mi nn oe See
a ayn e500
ni 231 138 10000
mi anya 13k rage
Mi aaayaan wax 3st00

HablaySoclaye med ear mabe a eek moan Teenee
saya iu wie sey ge a
“ye ew fm Toe fa Pang lar Tey Ie Fae a
cause othe wemendoasappetter Tey al ptr the edges
Se Set an om are ch meh mt dea
Te an mp a me ees a ty met

ala Tae andego + aking faafomaton ae ty 2d
‘ance tag the age eatgonne an hy ech 4 now 3p8
eo they shed en hve na twaday pores Ae hy eed
fen git Gy etaay gn wget on ew ean
‘ys never Tne pox the OW sage of dag grown
‘Tyls Giue mae wh ster pz bred ue They ae able
te produce tape fam str drags ater dave eee
Wazrrior, Skeleton

 

cuimaryrenmain any
Frequener ery we
ferreuuicenee repent 15 16

DAMACYATTACK By weapan 1 3 costae th

fae. Me ran
Monae hemp 13

Tormey powers salon warts ate undead de
Faced sa her mahensvah sae by panel ease oe
‘Somos nin tapped the sore m olin coke The ca soe
Serhan ter an on Tn lr

Jer can ae natver dn chan see, and can meray cm
ard ease or cou, sh a in ae
the cnet and the watnar te sped by move than 20
Fest cao ana Tanger canta he sear de ek
tly Tdslewas acy the war rmmedatch pels fed
fhe Taller seers te namal muvee ef contac

 

 

Ah ts me, the dtc no only mas held be cect fo he
Sted ene he fie the edu choc, he cay agen
{Glappoath stamping fo deaioy the curate and gem pase
{rl fas tno sand ev tt tem con any ean
| Sheesh wens analy ah we anda vada
Stalpon secs wet 2 bata tor atack ol tne om

‘Gy mage nespans at sheen wars They have 4
sox mage sewn The meh 2 ahon wavor

Hableysockiy Skekfon warns ne aecay Foard may he
fra woe they did fe former Inek 9 whee iy He
isan shektan watrat only has 2 sible calle
Stormo prsraped wih sronsing fe ea poten FZ
(ecae tenas pent

seo Jeet she. 1 etarm any ote pneabra
Wichtlin

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any
FREQUENCY:

ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Semi- (2-4)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil

 

NO. APPEARING: 1
ARMOR CLASS: 2
MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 4+4
THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: See below
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: +1 or better weapon to hit
MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below
SIZE: M (5’ tall)
MORALE: Steady (12)
XP VALUE: 1,400

Wichtlin are elven undead. They are relentless killers and deadly
adversaries.

Wichtlin appear as a pair of floating eyeballs and a pair of
floating, skeletal hands. Both the eyeballs and the hands glow
with a greenish color Those using detect invisibility, true seeing.
or a similar spell can see the wichtlin’s entire form: a blackened el-
ven skeleton draped with shards of rotting flesh.

Wichtlin are a result of an ancient curse on the court of Queen
Sylvyana, a Silvanesti elf also known as the Ghoul Queen. AIl
known records of her reign were destroyed by the Silvanesti, and
only fragments of rumors remain When an elf of evil alignment
dies violently, there is a 1% chance that Chemosh, the Lord of the
Undead, in conjunction with the spirit of Queen Sylvyana, claims
his spirit and resurrects him as a wichtlin.

Combat: A wichtlin’s sole motivation is to kill victims in order
for Chemosh to attempt to claim their spirits. Wichtlin are unaf-
fected by poison and paralyzation They are immune to sleep,
charm, hold, and cold-based spells; fire scores normal damage.
They can only be hit with +1 or better magical weapons. Holy
water causes 2d4 points of damage per vial. Opponents who can
see the entire wichtlin with detect invisibility or similar spells
make their attack rolls normally; all others suffer a -2 penalty to
their attack roll. Wichtlin are turned as spectres.

Wichtlin do not use weapons. Their left hands cause victims to
become paralyzed for 2d4 rounds unless their victims roll success-
ful saving throws vs. paralyzation. Their right hands inflict 2d6
points of poison damage unless their victims roll successful saving
throws vs. poison (victims protected by slow poison or its equiv-
alent are unaffected by the wichtlin’s poison attack).

These creatures also have the following properties:

* A wichtlin that was a spellcaster in its previous life retains its
spellcasting abilities at half its prior level of ability (for instance, a
7th-level evil mage would cast spells as a 4th-level mage when res-
urrected as a wichtlin).

* Tt a wichtlin successfully paralyzes an elf, the wichtlin’s gaze

 

 

 

 

can implant a suggestion (as the 3rd-level wizard spell) in the elf,
unless the elf rolls a successful saving throw vs. spell.

* An elf killed by a wichtlin becomes a wichtlin in seven days
unless the elf is resurrected or otherwise revived. The body de-
velops a faint glow during that time and begins to fade, except for
the eyes and hands.

* When a wichtlin slays any opponent, the wichtlin becomes
fully visible for 1d4 rounds. However, it remains noncorporeal,
with the exception of its hands and eyes.

Habitat/Society: Wichtlin can be found anywhere; they can
even be seen trudging along the ocean floor. So rare are wichtlin
that they are never encountered in groups. Wichtlin have no in-
terest in treasure.

Ecology: As with other undead, wichtlin do not eat, sleep, or
perform any other physiological functions. They are occasionally
employed by the evil gods or powerful evil wizards as assassins or
warriors.

Kagonesti Wichtlin and Wichtlin Wild Stags

If an evil Kagonesti elf meets a violent death while riding a wild
stag mount, the spirit of the wild stag may also be claimed by
Chemosh and resurrected along with the elf. The wichtlin wild
stag appears as a pair of eyes and antlers, both glowing green; in
most other respects, it is similar to a living wild stag (AC 7; MV
24; HD 3; #AT 1 or 2; Dmg 2d4 or 1d3/1d3; THACO 17). How-
ever, the wichtlin stag can only be hit by +1 or better magical
weapons. If a victim is struck by an antler attack, he must roll a
successful saving throw vs. paralyzation or become paralyzed for
2d4 rounds. The wichtlin wild stag obeys all commands of its
wichtlin rider; however, if the stag is separated from its wichtlin
by more than 20 yards for a full round, it disappears, never to re-
turn. It also disappears if its wichtlin rider is killed.

 
Wyndlass

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate / Forest and swamp
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: Z
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 3
MOVEMENT: 3

HIT DICE: 12

THACO: 9

NO. OF ATTACKS: il
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-10 (x10)/1-4
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Surprise
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: H (20’ long)
MORALE: Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: 5,000

The wyndlass is a tentacled horror that lurks in desolate swamps
and gloomy forests. A powerful predator, it has been known to
devour several whole horses at a time in its quest to satisfy its
awesome hunger. Few living men can tell the tale of a firsthand
encounter with a wyndlass, as few ever survive such a meeting.
Although the wyndlass is seldom (if ever) seen by those it
hunts, there have been occasions when it was sighted out of its pit
by those with the sense to quickly note its appearance and then
flee for their lives. From these accounts we know that the
wyndlass looks something like a giant black octopus with no
fewer than ten tentacles. Each of these whiplike limbs is over 25
feet long and covered with keen barbs that sink deep into the flesh
of prey. The tendrils attach to the body in two clusters of five
limbs each. Between the two clusters are the creature’s three eyes
(which glow with a faint blue light) and its powerful beak.

Combat: When a wyndlass has buried itself in its quicksand pit
(see “Ecology”), it lies very still and awaits the passing of a poten-
tial victim. As soon as something steps into its pit, the horror un-
furls its tendrils and grabs hold of the prey, pulling it under the
surface of the quicksand. When the wyndlass attacks in this man-
ner, it imposes a -5 penalty to its opponents’ surprise rolls. Once a
victim is pulled beneath the surface of the quicksand pit, it
quickly suffocates (see “Holding Your Breath,” 2nd Edition Play-
ers Handbook, page 122) and can be devoured by the wyndlass at
its leisure.

Anyone caught in the grip of the wyndlass cannot take any
action to defend himself from the attacks of the other tentacles or
the bite of the beak. As a rule, the wyndlass devotes one of its
tendril clusters to each opponent; thus, although it has ten limbs,
the wyndlass can attack only two opponents at once. In addition,
the creature’s beak can bite only those who are held in its tendrils.

Anyone who attempts to wrench himself free of the wyndlass’s
tendrils is torn and cut by the barbs that cover their surface.
Whenever an ensnared character attempts to break free, he must

 

 

 

 

roll a successful bend bars/lift gates check. In so doing, however,
he suffers 1d6 points of damage for each limb that was wrapped
about him.

The wyndlass takes no delight in killing and is not an evil crea-
ture, but its great size requires that it hunt very often and this has
led to its reputation as an evil and hateful thing.

Habitat/Society: The wyndlass is a solitary creature that spends
most of its life at the bottom of its quicksand pit awaiting prey.
Most intelligent creatures stay well clear of a wyndlass’s lair (if
they learn about it before being devoured).

A wyndlass sets up its lair by burrowing into the earth along a
well-traveled game path or road. As it digs, it exudes a tine oil
that mixes with the soil to form a substance that has far less sur-
face tension than water or normal quicksand. Those who have
had the chance to examine a pool of wyndlass quicksand claim
that it is so slippery that you cannot actually feel it when you run
it between your fingers. Whether or not that is the case, it is im-
possible to swim in the substance as it offers almost no support at
all. When a creature steps onto the pit, it instantly plunges be-
neath the surface and is attacked by the wyndlass.

When a wyndlass feels that game is becoming scarce in a given
area, it pulls itself out of its pit and begins the slow migration to a
new home. As a rule, the wyndlass relocates like this only once a
year or so.

Ecology: A powerful hunter in its own right, the wyndlass has

few (if any) natural enemies. On occasion, it may be sought out
and destroyed by teams of adventurers, however, because of the
oil that it secretes. As a lubricant, wyndlass oil is second to none.
While this alone might be enough to bring a few hunters out after
the wyndlass, it is the creature’s use to alchemists and wizards
that most often spawns a hunting party. Wyndlass oil is one of the
most common, and important, ingredients in oil of slipperiness,
and it is often sought for this purpose.
Yaggol

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Jungle
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Tribal
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night
DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: U (B)
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil
NO. APPEARING: 1d6
ARMOR CLASS: 4
MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 9

THACO: 11

NO. OF ATTACKS: 6
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d6+4/1d6+4, Special
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Mind blast
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Camouflage
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 50%

SIZE: M (7’)
MORALE: 15

XP VALUE: 4,000

The yaggol are a degenerate sub-race of the evil and terrifying
mind flayers Degenerate, in this case, does not mean more de-
based or decadent (mind flayers are already decadent in the ex-
treme). Rather, the yaggol have culturally regressed, and their
once formidable mental powers have atrophied and are
forgotten.

In appearance, the yaggol are almost identical with their cous-
ins. They are larger, standing about seven feet tall, and have
greater physical power. They have the same uncanny resem-
blance to malevolent octopi, including the four long tentacles that
hide their mouth. Their skin is chameleonlike, shifting in color
and pattern to match the background. The possible color changes
range from brilliant rich green to a scarlet orange, encompassing
various shades of browns, greens, and yellows. They possess
three fingers on each hand, weirdly jointed so that any one can
oppose the other two. The older members of their community
dress in flowing robes, while the youths often wear nothing more
than simple loincloths.

Combat: Although they have lost much of the intelligence of
their ancestors, the yaggol are still incredibly dangerous and cun-
ning in combat. They are extremely hard to spot if hidden against
a natural background—one that falls within the color range of
their powers. Elves have a 50% chance of noticing them, all oth-
ers have a 20% chance. The yaggol must be within 30 feet before
they can be spotted. If not detected, the yaggol automatically at-
tack with surprise.

Once in combat, a yaggol attacks with its fists, delivering pow-
erful blows. In addition, it can attack with its long tentacles. As
with the mind flayer, any tentacle that hits will worm its way to
the victims brain in 1d4 rounds. It then sucks the brain out and
eats it Each round these attached tentacles cause an automatic
1d6 points of damage. Victims can tear free if they roll a success-
ful Strength check, but doing so causes 1d10 points of damage per
attached tentacle.

The yaggol have lost nearly all the great mental powers of mind

 

 

 

 

flayers. Thus they have no innate spell ability and possess only a
simple mind blast. This affects those within a radius of ten feet
around the creatures. All within the area must roll a successful
saving throw vs. wand or suffer 3d6 points of damage from the
intense mental agony the creatures radiate. Their own kind (in-
cluding the more advanced illithids) are immune to this effect.
The mind blast places a great strain on the creatures; they must
wait an hour before attempting it again. Furthermore, it dazes
them for the round immediately after. They can take no actions as
they recover their wits.

The yaggol are extremely savage and ferocious. At the same
time, they are not so stupid as to fight against hopeless odds.
They freely retreat from battles that go against them, even leav-
ing their own kind behind. When they can, they take slaves (din-
ner for a later date). Failing this, they seek to kill as many as
possible to provide a large quantity of fresh meat for the tribe.

Habitat/Society: The yaggol are descended from the more power-

ful and numerous race of mind flayers, a stellar race from the
dark, cold reaches of space. According to their legends, which are
extremely garbled, the yaggol once inhabited the stars but are
now confined to the earth after offending some powerful being.
Much more likely is that they are the survivors of a failed coloni-
zation attempt on Taladas, a failure caused by the destruction of
the Cataclysm. They speak yaggol and whatever the local tongue
is—cha’asi on Taladas. Originally a race that loved only dark-
ness, the yaggol have adapted to surface life, although they still
favor the comforting gloom of the jungle. They do not venture
beyond the humid warmth of the jungle.

Ecology: The yaggol have a lifespan of no more than 60 years.
spending the first five in a tadpole state. During this time there is
the distinct possibility of being eaten by their elders in times of
famine. Birth rates are accordingly high to adjust for the low
chances of survival to adulthood. As a race they are asexual and
in conversation freely refer to themselves as both he and she, hav-
ing no understanding of the difference in the two words.
Yeti-kin, Saqualaminoi

= z: Lig : = a

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Cold mountains
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Family groups
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: (R, W)
ALIGNMENT: Neutrai

NO. APPEARING: 1d6

ARMOR CLASS: 5
MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 8

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2d8/2d8
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Immune to cold
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: L (107)
MORALE: 10

XP VALUE: 2,000

The saqualaminoi are a race of humanoid creatures, hulking in
height. Adapted to the harsh conditions of the high frozen moun-
tams, their bodies are covered with white or gray fur. This is espe-
cially thick on the soles of their feet and even covers their palms.
Their heads seem to be squashed between their shoulders. Their
facial features are small and flat to prevent frostbite They have
prominent fangs, but do not attack with these They are intelli-
gent although extremely primitive.

Combat: The saqualaminoi are not subtle or particularly clever
fighters. They have never had to be, since their size and power
has generally assured they are the biggest creatures in their habi-
tat. Furthermore, although fearsome in appearance, they are ac-
tually rather peaceful. They only attack for food or in
self-defense.

In combat, they fight with their powerful fists, striking smash-
ing blows capable of felling an ordinary man A few have learned
to make simple bone, wood, and stone clubs. These weapons
cause 2d6 + 4 points of damage, but the creature can make only
one attack per round

Being well adapted to snow and cold, saqualaminoi are im-
mune to cold-based attacks, normal or magical (although they
still suffer from falling pieces of ice, etc.). Furthermore, their
broad feet and claws enable them to move across snow and ice
with no movement penalties.

Habitat/Ecology: The saqualaminoi live in the highest mountain
ranges either just below or on the fringes of the great glaciers that

 

 

 

 

 

fill these peaks. Here they make their homes in the ice caves
crevasses that break the frozen wall. Their lives are simple, orga-
nized around small family units. Each bull takes a female and to-
gether they raise their young. Several families living in the same
area form a community. This is nothing more than a loose assem-
blage of families that only occasionally bands together for the
common good.

The most common cooperative action is hunting. The creatures
are carnivores, but are not particularly fierce. They prey mostly
on the sheep. mountain goats, and marmots found at high alti-
tudes. They do not attack other humanoids, but do fight in de-
fense. They do not normally attack humanoids. Instead they tend
to be very curious about creatures of similar appearance.

In times of bad weather or poor food, the saqualaminoi are
forced to raid outside their range. Since the fierce winter storms
frequently drive away game, these raids most often occur during
periods of foul weather. Thus the saqualaminoi have earned the
reputation as monsters that come out of the snowstorms to raid
and kill.

The saqualaminoi are an intelligent people. They have a simple
language of grunts and howls. They make very simple stone and
wood tools They do not have a written language or many highly
developed concepts of good or evil, but they tend to be good by
nature

Ecology: The saqualaminoi are primitive predators. Their pelts
are too coarse to be of value. The little treasure they collect comes
from the minor baubles they find interesting.
Temperate Encounters

Temperate Plain or Scrub

Shimmerweed

Wyvern (gold dragon 10%)
Bear, brown, or elf

Emre or axebeak
Kingfisher

Boar, wild (giant boar 10%)
Dog, wild, or jackal

Wolf

10 Herd animal

11 Plainsman (merchant 10%)
12 Plainsman or NPC party °
13 Horse, wild

14 Draconian '

15 Hobgoblin

16 Ogre 4

17 Snake, poisonous

18 Griffon or troll

19 DM Special

20 DM Special

wren a»rt wn

Temperate Forest

2 Dragon, green

3 Elf, Kagonesti (other elf 10%)
4 Lynx, giant

5 Badger, giant

6 Weasel, giant, or giant skunk
7 Owl, giant, or satyr

8 Wolf or brown bear

9 Tribesman (NPC party” 10%)
10 Stag or giant stag

11 Mammal, small

(giant porcupine 10%)

12 Centaur

13. Draconian |

14 Ogre * or slig

15 Wyndlass

16 Spider, whisper

17 Beetle, stag or bombardier
18 Ghoul or wichtlin

19 DM Special
20 DM Special

 

Temperate Mountain

2 Dragon, copper or red

3 Bear, cave, or winter wolf

4 Dwarf, Gully or Theiwar

5 Bear, brown

6 Leopard, snow or spotted lion
7 Kingfisher or kyrie

8 Wolf, dire

9 Tribesman (NPC party * 10%)
10 Badger, giant, or giant eagle
11 Draconian 4

12 Vulture or giant vulture

13. Ogre * or slig

14 Dwarf, Hylar

15 Ghoul or wichtlin

16 Troll

17 Phaethon

18 Will 0° wisp (sylph 10%)

19 DM Special

20 DM Special

Temperate Marsh or Swamp

2 Wyndlass

Dragon, black

Toad or frog (poisonous)
Toad or frog (giant)

Lizard, giant

NPC party °

Tribesman (merchant 10%)
Tribesman

10 Draconian *

11 Hobgoblin

12 Dwarf, Gully

13 Snake, const. or pois.

14 Slig

15 Ghoul (wichtlin 10%)

16 Troll

17 Will o’ wisp

18 Ghast (groaning spirit 10%)
19 Wyndlass

20 DM Special

WANA UF Ww

 

Notes for all tables

Monsters separated by “or” are
each 50% likely to occur.

Monsters in italic type are 75%
likely to be airborne when they
are encountered.

' This is usually a party of baaz
(60%), bozak (30%), or kapak
(10%), although combined groups
led by a more powerful leader
(sivak or aurak) are occasionally
encountered.

* Including ruins (cities,
temples, fortresses) within five
miles of the party.

* Thanoi are only encountered if
the temperature is freezing or
below.

“All wilderness ogre encounters
are 10% likely to be with irda.

° NPC parties in the wilderness
are often close to the PC party in
number, level, and equipment.
Otherwise the typical NPC party

is 7th to 10th level, with hench-
men of approximately half (round
up) of the NPCs’ average level.
Such parties are 90% likely to be
mounted. For random generation
of NPC parties, refer to the tables
provided at the end of Monstrous
Compendium 1 or Monstrous
Compendium 2.

° Raiders in human or
demihuman lands are draconians,
minotaurs, ogres, etc., while in
draconian lands, they are human
and demihuman rebels.

DM Specials

When this result comes up on
an encounter table, the DM
should either choose a creature
based on party level, or roll
randomly on the table provided at
the end of this section. A special
encounter can also be a natural
hazard (storm, avalanche, etc.) or
an encounter with a known NPC.

2 Dragon, black

3 Dwarf, Gully

4 Bear, brown, or giant badger
5 Snake, pois. or spitting

6 Lion, mountain

7 Stag or herd animal

8 Dwarf, Neidar

9 Tribesman (NPC party ° 10%)
10 Griffon

11. Draconian !

12 Hobgoblin or goblin

13. Wolf, dire

14 Ogre * or slig

15 Troll or skyfisher

16 Ghoul or shadow

17 Spider, trap door or whisper
18 Ghast

19 DM Special

20 DM Special

 

Temperate Desert

2 Dragon, blue
3 Dragon, brass or copper
4 Sandling or sand worm
5 Tylor

6 Hatori

7 Horse, wild

8 Dog, wild

9 Plainsman or NPC party”
10 Plainsman or draconian |
11 Merchant

12 Wemic

13 Goblin or hobgoblin

14 Wolf, dire

15 Snake, pois. or spitting
16 Skrit (insect swarm 10%)
17 Vulture or giant vulture
18 Griffon

19 DM Special

20 DM Special

 

Arctic & Subarctic
Encounters
Arctic (all terrain)

Pudding, white
Dragon, white
Remorhaz

Owl, giant
Herd animal
Herd animal
Herd animal
Ice Folk

Ice Folk

11 Bear, ice

12 Blizzard or unsafe ice

OomyN aU WN

13 Wolf, dire
14 Wolf, winter
15 Thanoi®

16 Thanoi®

17 Yeti-kin, Saqualaminoi
18 Yeti-kin, Saqualaminoi
19 DM Special
20 DM Special

 

Dragon, white
Baluchitherium

2

3

4 Mammoth or mastodon
5 Bear, brown

6 NPC party”

7 Ice Folk

8 Ice Folk

9 Herd animal

10 Herd animal

11 Wolf, dire

12 Wolf, dire

13. Ogre 4

14. Gnoll

15 Owl, giant, or giant boar
16 Wolf, winter

17 Leopard, snow*

18 Ettin

19 DM Special

20 DM Special

* Same as normal leopard.

 

Subarctic Mountain

2 Dwarf, Hylar
3 Dragon, white
4 Sylph
5 Leopard, snow*
6 Gnoll
7 Ice Folk or NPC party”
8 Bear, ice
9 Herd animal
10 Owl, giant
11 Wolf, dire
12 Ogre *
13. Troll, 2-headed
14 Vulture or giant vulture
15 Wolf, winter
16 = Yeti-kin, Saqualaminoi
17 Giant, hill, or annis (hag)
18  Remorhaz
19 DM Special
20 DM Special

* Same as normal leopard.

 

Subarctic Forest

Giant, hill, or annis (hag)
Giant, hill, or annis (hag)
Bear, ice
Rat, giant
NPC party”
Ice Folk
Weasel, giant, or
giant wolverine
9 Stag or giant stag
10 Herd animal
11 Bear, brown
12 Lynx, giant
13. Wolf, dire
14 Ogre * or troll
15 Boar, giant
16 Owl, giant
17. Gnoll
18 Troll, 2-headed
19 DM Special
20 DM Special

aunaak ON
Subarctic Marsh or Swamp

2
3
4

Dragon, white
Dragon, white
Wolf, winter

5 Mammoth

6
7

Rat, giant
Wolf, dire

8 Owl, giant
9 Gnoll

10 Gnoll

11 Herd animal

12
13

Herd animal
Ice Folk

14 Troll

15 Troll. 2-headed
16 Thanoi*

17 Thanoi*

18 Hydra, cryo-
19 DM Special

20 DM Special

Tropical or Subtropical Mountain

2 Irda

Kyrie

Merchant

Herd animal

Herd animal

Kingfisher or galeb dul
Minotaur or slig

Ogre’ or minotaur

10 Tribesman

11 Wolf, dire

12 Wolf, dire

13 Bandit (slaver)

14 Vulture or giant vulture
15 Leopard or spotted lion
16 Snake, poisonous

17 Phaethon

18 Sylph

19 DM Special

20 DM Special

OMNIA OF W

 

Subarctic Rough or Hills’

Dragon, white

Giant, hill, or annis (hag)
Giant, hill, or annis (hag)
Bear, brown

Ice Folk

Owl, giant, or giant rat
Bear, cave

NPC party °

Gnoll

Gnoll

Wolf, dire

Herd animal

Herd animal

Troll

Ettin or 2-headed troll
Wolf, winter

Yeti-kin, Saqualaminoi
DM Special

DM Special

 

Tropical Encounters

Tropical or subtropical

Ow mOnN DOB WN

10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

Plain or Scrub

Ogre, orughi

Ogre *

Dog, wild, or wolf
Emre

Wolf

Bandit (slaver)
Merchant

Herd animal

Herd animal

“Wari

Minotaur or slig
Tribesman

NPC party” or raider °
Stag

Snake, poisonous or spitting
Spider, huge or giant
Spider, whisper

DM Special

DM Special

Tropical or Subtropical Forest

2 Wyndlass
3 Naga, spirit
4 Mantrap

5 Centipede, giant

6 Choke creeper

7 Spider, huge or giant

8 Tribesman or bandit (slaver)
9 Tribesman or NPC party °
10 Centaur

11 Hobgoblin

12 Satyr or insect swarm

13. Herd animal

14 Snake, const. or pois.

15 Kingfisher

16 Ape, carnivorous

17 Toad, giant or poisonous
18 Ape, carnivorous

19 DM Special

20 DM Special

 

Tropical or subtropical
Marsh or Swamp

Wyndlass

Crocodile

Crocodile

Toad, giant or poisonous
Herd animal

Herd animal

Frog, giant or poisonous
Tribesman or NPC party”
10 Minotaur or slig

11 Insect swarm

12 Snake, const. or pois.

13 Centipede, giant

14 Leech, giant, or whisper spider
15 Stirge

16 Lizard, giant

17 Lizard, minotaur

18 Ghast or ghoul

19 DM Special

20 DM Special

CmOnND FP WN

  

Tropical or Subtropical

MONA OF WN

9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

Rough or Hills*

Shadow

Scorpion, giant, or horax
Mantrap

Dwarf, Hylar

Boar, warthog

Lizard, giant

Bandit (slaver) or NPC party
Tribesman or merchant
Minotaur or slig

Dog, wild, or jackal
Herd animal

Herd animal

Wolf, dire

Shake, const. or spitting
Kingfisher

Skyfisher

Griffon

DM Special

DM Special

5

 

Tropical or subtropical Desert

2

WON DT

11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

Sandling

Dragon, brass

Tylor

Lizard, giant

Bandit (slaver)

Camel, dromedary
Merchant

Plainsman or NPC party”
Wemic

Wolf

Draconian! or minotaur
Dog, wild

Snake, pois. or spitting
Hatori

Centipede, huge or giant
Scorpion, huge or giant
Horax

DM Special

DM Special

 

Salt Water Encounters

Cold Water Surface*

2

On HD 1 WwW

10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

Sea dragon or amphi dragon
Ghaggler or thanoi’
Kalothagh

Scrag

Depths encounter”
Warship or fisherman
Narwhal

Merchant

Shark

Whale

Pirate or killer whale
Hazard (ice)*
Dolphin

Aerial encounter

Ghost ship?

Will 0’ wisp
Merman

DM Special

DM Special

 
  
 

 

  

Hchices

eal li a ak

 
 

 

Cold Water Depths

2 Kraken

3 Anemone or vodyanoi
4 Ghaggler

5 Lobster, giant (crayfish)
6 Snake, giant sea

7 Dolphin

8 Merman

9 Quipper, giant, or giant
10 Whale or octopus

11 Whale or fish school ©
12 Fish school ©

13 Shark

14 Sea lion

15 Kapoacinth

16 Squid, giant

17 Shark, giant

18 Sunken ship ©

19 DM Special

20 DM Special

 

Temperate Water Surface *

No

Sea dragon or amphi dragon
Ghost ship?

Otter, sea

Ghaggler

Depths encounter”

Pirate ship

Sea lion

9 Serpent, jade (giant eel)

10 Shark

11 Merchant

12 Whale

13 Elf, Dimernesti

14 Warship or kalothagh

15 Aerial encounter

16 Fisherman or seaweed"

17 Seaweed" (strangleweed 10%)
18 Will 0° wisp

19 DM Special

20 DM Special

COND TP WwW

 
   

 

Temperate Water Depths

2 Kraken

3 Vodyanoi

4 Anemone

5 Lamprey, giant

6 Ghaggler

7 Sea lion or hippocampus

8 Koalinth
9 Fish School‘

10 Fish School‘
11 Shark

12 Whale

13 Eel, giant

14 Dolphin

15 Elf, Dargonesti
16 Mermen

17 Shark, giant
18 Squid, giant
19 DM Special
20 DM Special
Tropical Water Surface*

2 Ghost ship?

3 Strangleweed

4 Pirate, small boat
5 Pirate, warship

6 Depths encounter °
7 Shark, giant

8 Kalothagh

9 Seaweed’

10 Whale

11 Merchant

12 Fisherman

13 Shark

14 Elf, Dimernesti
15 Ghaggler or aerial encounter

16 Warship
17 Imp, Blood Sea
18 Sirine

19 DM Special
20 DM Special

Tropical Water Depths
2 Nudibranch (giant slug)

3 Anemone

4 Snake, poisonous

5 Ray, sting

6 Octopus or manta ray
7 Ghaggler

8

Elf, Dargonesti

9 Seaweed’ or strangleweed

10 Fish school®

11 Fish school®

12 Shark

13 Eel, giant

14 Barracuda

15 Hippocampus or triton

16 Kapoacinth or lacedon

17 Snake, sea or,
nudibranch (giant slug)

18 Merman

19 DM Special

20 DM Special

 

Notes for All Aquatic Encounter Tables

“ All surface encounters: Unin-
telligent monsters are 75% likely
to be driven off by flaming oil
nearby, 90% if actually burned by
it. Large amounts of food thrown
overboard are 50% likely to end
such an encounter.

® Depths encounter: Roll on the
appropriate table for that climate.
If the encounter is not suitable,
then none occurs.

© Fish school: This is a large
group of fish of the same type, the
aquatic version of herd animals.
Although they usually do not
attack (unless commanded by
magical means), if panicked they
might mill about, obstructing.
vision and movement. If large
enough, they might cause buffet-
ing damage (1-2 to 1-8 points,
depending on size).

Ghost ship: This is a lost ship
manned by undead. Although it
can be seen at any time, it will
usually attack only at night, when
its masters are at full power. Roll
percentile dice, once for the crew
and once for the leaders.

D100 Roll Crew

01-40 10-40 skeletons
41-80 10-40 zombies
81-00 10-20 juju zombies

D100 Roll Leader

01-30 1-4 wights
31-60 1-3 wraiths
61-80 1-2 spectres
81-95 1-2 ghosts
96-00 1 lich

* Hazard (ice): A single huge ice
mountain or 10-20 smaller, grind-
ing floes. Hard contact with ice
reduces seaworthiness by 5% and
is 10% likely to require a seawor-
thiness check to avoid sinking.

* Seaweed: This includes both
floating masses of weed and beds
on the bottom. The former slows
ships by 50%. The latter are 30-
300 feet high and reduce vision to
ten feet. Both have a 40% chance
for another encounter if moved
through or investigated.

© Sunken ship: This is a victim
of storms, ice, or hostile action.
Often these have their original
cargo and may be inhabited. Roll
percentile dice for treasure:

01-10 Has merchant treasure (see
Men, merchant)

11-20 No treasure

21-60 2-24 lacedons (original
crew)

61-00 Monster (roll on appropri-
ate encounter table)

"Hazard (navigational): This
can ground or damage a vessel
that does not have a pilot familiar
with the waters. Such hazards as
sandbars and submerged logs
often change position.

DM specials on or below the
surface of the water can include
morkoth, mottled worms, ship-
wreck survivors, an eye of the
deep, sudden storms, seaweed that
enables underwater breathing
when eaten, giant clams, aquatic
versions of carnivorous plants,
storm giants, and so on.

 

Fresh Water Encounters

Cold Water Surface*

2 Sea dragon or amphi dragon
3 Greenhag

4 Otter, giant

5 Lacedon

6 Depths encounter®
7 Swan (swanmay 10%)
8 Pirate

9 Land encounter

10 Hazard (navigational)
11 Fisherman or trapper
12 Merchant

13. Otter or beaver

14 Aerial encounter

15 Nixie

16 Merrow

17 Scrag

18 Naga, water
DM Special
DM Special

 

Cold Water Depths

2 Anemone

Otter, giant

Quipper, common or giant
Kalothagh

Lacedon or kapoacinth
Kaolinth

Crayfish, giant

Crab, giant

10 Fish school’

11 Fish school®

12 Nixie or giant pike

13 Nixie or giant gar

14 octopus

15 Merrow

16 Lamprey or marine ee
17 Snake, giant sea

18 Sunken ship®

19 DM Special

20 DM Special

Cony aA oe Ww

\o

Temperate Water Depths

Sea dragon or amphi dragon
Nymph

Anemone

Catfish or leech, giant
Ghaggler or lamprey
Kapoacinth

Koalinth

Beetle, giant water
Spider, giant water

Fish school ©

Pike, giant

Crayfish, giant

Quipper, giant

Nixie

Gar, giant

Octopus or giant lamprey
Lacedon

DM Special

DM Special

 

 

Temperate Water Surface*

No

Crayfish, giant
Nymph

Otter, giant

Ghaggler

Depths encounter’
Swan (swanmay 10%)
Merrow

9 Land encounter

10 Frog, giant or giant leech
11 Hazard (navigational)”
12 Otter

13 Fisherman or merchant
14 Aerial encounter

15 Pirate or warship

16 Beetle, giant water

17 Lacedon

18 Scrag or sea hag

19 DM Special

20 DM Special

COND FS WwW

Temperate Water Surface*

17
18
19
20

Violet jelly (ochre jelly)

Nymph

Imp, Blood Sea

Imp, Blood Sea

Depths encounter’

Snake, giant const.

Pirate, small boat

Eel, electric

Hazard (navigational)

Fisherman or merchant

Piranha

Kalothagh

Aerial encounter

Seaweed’

Seaweed" (choke
creeper 10%)

Frog, giant or poisonous

Naga, water

DM Special

DM Special

 

Tropical Water Depths

=
CDCemANA UF WN

Anemone

Eel, weed

Merrow

Beetle, giant water
Spider, giant water
Snake, giant const.
Seaweed’ or strangleweed
Crab or crayfish, giant
octopus

Piranha, giant

Fish school®

Serpent, jade (as Eel, giant)
Elf, Dimernesti

Nixie

Kapoacinth

Naga, water

Snake, giant sea

DM Special

DM Special
Special Encounters
Inhabited of Patrolled Areas

Freeman or peasant
Freeman or peasant
Patrol
10 Patrol or wolf
11 Merchant
12 Merchant
13 Bandit
14 Herd animal
15 Raider ° (or rebel)
16 Bear, black, or hobgoblin
17 Boar, wild
18 Ogre ‘
19 DM Special
20 DM Special
Inhabited area encounters are
usually with the area’s dominant
race; for example, a patrol in dra-
conian territory probably consists
of baaz or bozaks.

2 Wilderness Table

3 Wilderness Table

4 Patrol

5 Patrol or NPC party”
6 Traveler

7

8

9

 

Aerial Encounters

2 Wyvern

3 Phaethon or kyrie
4 Vulture, giant

5 Vulture

6 Griffon

7 Owl, giant

8 Eagle, giant

9 Eagle

10 Hawk, large, or owl

11 Hawk, small

12 Common bird or bat
13. Common bird or bat
14. Common bird

15 Kingfisher

16 Kingfisher

17 Skyfisher

18 Harpy

19 DM Special

20 DM Special

Haunted Forest (Wayrwuth)

2 Groaning spirit

3 Dryad or swanmay

4 Sprite or pixie

5 Bear, brown, or giant boar
6 Dreamshadow or

dreamwraith

7 Unicorn

8 Stag or giant stag

9 Ogre or Irda
10 Bandit or traveler
11 Centaur or Elf, Kagonesti
12 Wolf, dire
13 Badger, giant, or giant weasel
14 Mammal, small
15 Troll or spectral minion
16 Ghoul or wichtlin
17 Choke creeper
18 Evil treant or wyndlass
19 DM Special
20 DM Special

Border Ethereal Encounters

Elemental, water
Elemental, fire
Elemental, air
Elemental, earth
Salamander
Ghost or groaning spirit
Couatl
Human traveler*
10 Kodragon
11 Ki-rin
12 Lammasu
13 Spider, phase
14 Invisible stalker
15 Xorn or fire minion
16 Eyewing
17 Aerial servant
18 Ethereal cyclone* *
19 DM Special
20 DM Special

* The NPC Party table is used
with the following modifications:
Party size is 1d6 with no class re-
strictions. One cleric is always
present, and at least one mage if
party size is two or more. Level
ranges are: Priest 9-18, Wizard 11-
20, Warrior 8-15, Rogue 8-17.

* * An ethereal cyclone requires
a saving throw vs. spell. Those
who fail are blown to a single ran-
dom location: on the Prime Mate-
rial (80%), an inner plane (15%),
or to an unknown location until
rescued or otherwise able to reach
the Prime Material (5 %). A de-
tailed treatment can be found in
the Manual of the Planes.

OMAN DA AF WN

 

Blood Sea Encounters
(Refer to regular aquatic
encounter tables for notes)

2 Sea dragon or amphi dragon
Hag, sea
Elf, Dargonesti
Imp, Blood Sea
Dolphin
Shark
Pirate
9 Merchant
10 Warship, minotaur
11 Warship, minotaur
12 Fish school®
13 Fish school®
14 Kalothagh
15 Seaweed" (strangleweed 10%)
16 Storm*
17 Storm*
18 Ghost ship?
19 DM Special
20 DM Special
* Storm causes a seaworthiness
check. It delays a journey by 1d4
days (50% ) or blows the ship 20-
200 miles in a random direction.

ONDA OTF WwW

 

 

Underdark Encounters

2 Phycomid or ascomoid
3. Mold, brown, or green slime
4 Worm, purple
5 Ochre jelly or violet fungus
6 Xorn or jarak-sinn
7 Carrion crawler or roper
8 Shadowperson
9 Worm, tunnel, or
boring beetle
10 Horax
11 Shrieker or unusual fungus*
12 Dwarf, Gully
13. Mold, yellow or giant slug
14 Dwarf, Zakhar or Daergar
15 Dwarf, Theiwar
16 Slithering tracker or
gelatinous cube

17 Aboleth or yaggol
18 Spider, whisper
19 DM Special
20 DM Special

* Unusual fungus has a special
property assigned by the DM: be-
ing exceptionally nourishing, giv-
ing off light, curing damage or
disease, neutralizing poison,
causing weakness if eaten, etc.

DM specials might include
trained hunting spiders, pack
lizard trains, ochre jellies of twice
normal size, bakali artifacts, etc.

Lava Sea Encounter

Fire elemental, 24 HD
Othlorx (red dragon)
Poison gas

Fire elemental, 8 HD
Imp, Lava Sea, or fire snakes
Irritating gas

Smoke or steam fog
Heat blast

10 Heat mirage

11 Gnome fireship

12 Gnome fireship

13 Lava geyser

14 Fire minion

15 Gnome flyer

16 Salamander

17 Cooling rock mass
18 Whirlpool

19 DM Special

20 DM Special

Poison gas requires all exposed
creatures to make saving throws
vs. poison or die in 3d6 rounds.
Those exposed receive 1d4 points
of damage per turn of exposure.

Irritating gas inflicts 1d4 points
of damage per turn on exposed
creatures. Exposed creatures that
fail a saving throw vs. poison
suffer -2 penalties to attack rolls
and saving throws until 1d4 hours
after leaving the area.

Smoke and steam fog look like
dangerous gases, but have no
effect other than obscuring vision.

Heat blast occurs when a bub-
ble of hot lava bursts, inflicting
4d4 points of heat damage in a 20-
foot-diameter area.

Heat mirage is an illusion,
usually of a cooling rock island,
caused by the volcanic heat,

Cooling rock mass has the same
effect as an iceberg; see Hazard
(ice), note E under Salt Water and
Fresh Water encounter tables.

CmOnNA TF WN

DM Special Table

D100
Roll
01-04
05
06-07
08
09
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22-23
24

51-61
62
63-67

69
70
71-75
76
77
78
79-83
84
85

87

88

90
91
92
93
94
95

97-98
99
00

Encounter

Bandit

Bee, giant

Brownie

Dragon, black

Dragon, blue

Dragon, brass

Dragon, bronze

Dragon, copper

Dragon, gold

Dragon, green

Dragon, silver

Dragon, red

Dragon, white

Dragon, faerie

Dragon, kodragon

Dragon highlord

Draconian, aurak

Draconian, sivak

Dreamshadow

Dreamwraith

Dwarf, Gully

Dwarf) Daergar

Dwarf, Theiwar

Dwarf, Zakhar

Ettin or 2-headed troll

Fizban or NPC

Gargoyle

Giant, hill

Gnome, _ tinker

Gnome, mad

Golem, stone or iron

Groaning spirit

Harpy

Haunt, knight

Invisible stalker

Kender

Knight, death

Knight of Solamnia

Lamia noble

Leucrotta

Lich or skeleton warrior

Minotaur

Naga, guardian

Naga, spirit

Owl, talking

Patrol, men-or draconian

Poltergeist

Revenant

Rot grub

Shadow or
spectral minion

Skeleton or zombie

Spectre or vampire

Spider, phase

Undead beast

Undead beast or gholor

Water weird

White stag

Wight or wichtlin

Will 0’ wisp

Wraith

Wyvern

Xorn or umber hulk
 

 

Monstrous Compendium IV_ Statistics

 

Avian, Kingfisher 4-24 5 1, Fl 36(C) 1 1 1-4 No No Nil 19
Avian, Skyfisher 1-20 3 3, FI 24 (C) 4 lor2 3-11 or 1-6, 1-6 Yes No N 17
Avian, ‘Wari 6-60 0 15 3 2or1 1-2 1-4 or 3-12 Yes No Nil 17

 

Centaur, Abanasinian 5-30 5 18 4 2 1-6 and weapon No Yes CGorNC 17
Centaur, Crystalmir 5-30 5 18 or 30 1 2 1-6 and weapon No No CGor NG 17

Centaur, Endscape 5-30 5 18 4 2 3-8 and weapon (+1) No No CGorNC_ 17

         

    
 

Draconian, Aurak 1-2 0 15 8 2 or] 3-10 (x2) or spell Yes Yes LE 12
Draconian, Baaz 2-20 4 6 (15), GI 18 2 2or1 1-4 1-4 or by weapon No No LE or CE 19
Draconian, Bozak 2-20 2 6 (15), G1 18 4 2 or 1 1-4 1-4 or by weapon Yes Yes LE 17

    

Dragon, Amphi 1-4 3 6, Sw 24 9 3 + special 1-8/1-8/2-20 Yes Yes NE 12
Dragon, Astral (Mated) 2 (pair) 5 15, FI 48 (B) 35 6 3-60 (X4) 1-100 (x2) Yes Yes
Dragon, Astral (Unmated) 1 5 6, Fl 18 (C) 3 3 1-4/1-4/2-12 No Yes N 17

 

Dwarf, Daergar 4-400 4(10) 0 V 1 1-8 or by weapon Yes Yes V V
Dwarf, Gully 2-20 7(10) 6 Vv 1 or 2 1-4 Yes Yes Var. Var.
Dwarf, Hill (Neidar) 1 or 10-100 6 (10) 6 Var. 1 1-8 (weapon) Yes Yes Var, Vv

  
   

   

Elf, High —Silvanesti 20-200 5
Elf, High—Qualinesti 10-100
Elf, Sea--Dargonesti 10-40 8

—_
oO
a

Var. 1 1-10 (weapon) Yes Yes Var. Var.
Var. 1-10 (weapon) Yes Yes Var. Var.
Var. 1-10 (weapon) Yes Yes Var. Var.

ul
—~
ee
ao ©
Oo mM
in)
2
eS
ul
—
°
-

mo a
Re Ke

30 as dolphin

   

Elf, Half 5 (10) 9 (12) . 1-10 (weapon) Var. Var.
Eyewing 1-20 4 F1 24 (B) 3 3 or 1 1-6/1-6/1-4 Yes Yes LE 17
Fetch 1 4 6 9 2 Special Yes Yes CE 12

   

Gurik Cha’ahl 1-2 8 6 2 1 1-6 Yes No CE 19
Hatori 1 or 2-5 2 13 Var. 2 3-36/2-24 Yes No CN Var.
Haunt, Knight 1-8 2 9 8 2 1-8/1-8 Yes No LG 13

Insect Swarm:
Velvet Ants 1,000-100,000 8 6 Special 1 Special Yes No Nil Special

Grasshoppers & Locusts 1,000-100,000 8 or 6 6, FI 18 (C) Special 1 Special No No Nil Special

      

           

Knight, Death 1 0 Var. 9d10 1 +6 Yes Yes CE 12

Kvrie 2-13 5 6, FI 18 (B) 4 1 1-6 or by weapon Yes No N 17

Lizard Man, Jarak-sinn 10-40 5 6, Sw 12 2+1 3or1 1-2/1-2/1- 6 or 14 or Yes Yes N(E) 19
by weapon

Lizard Man, Bakali 1-10 7 9, Sw 9 2+1 3or1 1-2/1-2/1-6 or 1-4 or Yes Yes N(E) 19

by weapon
 

 

Monstrous Compendium IV Statistics

 

Name

Man, Rebel 2-20 by weapon

Minotaur, Blood Sea 1-8 or 20-400 5 f 12 Va > 2-8 1-4 or by weapon : ‘ ve vn
Ogre (Krynn) 2-20 4+1 1-10 or by weapon +6

    

   

   

Phaethon, Elder ®) 12, Fl 18 (B) i 24 or by weapon
Shadowperson 2-40 12, Fl 18 (C) se - Yes Yes
Shimmerweed 6-36 8 0 th 0 Ni Yes No N Nil

 

Slig, Champion 1 3 9 9 2 by weapon +4 Yes Yes LE 11
Slig, Ghaggler 3-30 3 6, Sw 15 3+3 1 1-4 or by weapon +2 Yes Yes LE 17
Spectral Minion:

 

 

 

Reveler 1-20+ r. 0, 1, or 2

Searcher 1-20+ ; : var 0, 1 or 2 7 weapon vs ves ve vr

Warrior 1-20+ r. 0, 1, or 2
Stag, White 1-12/1-6/1-6
Tayling 1 or t0- 100 mi ‘® D ‘L ! 1-3 vs vs Ne 10
Tayling (taylang) 1 or 10-100 1-8/1-8/2-12 + 2

to 9+12

Wichtlin 1 2 9 4+4 1 Special Yes Yes CE 19
Wyndlass 1 3 3 12 11 1-10 (x10) / 1-4 Yes No 2? 9
Yaggol 1-6 4 12 9 6 5-10/5-10 + special Yes Yes LE ia
Yeti-kin, Saqualaminoi 1-6 5 9 8 2 2-16/2-16 No Yes N 13
 
 
ae

ar

tana
re

 
 
 

a UalcMo) (6 lan oli ca Rela wA Lops ecelec)
Compendium series brings you the
unique creatures of Krynn: astral
dragons, Krynn minotaurs, the various
ir-\e mca n flere) mal A oR
ranitcdalMol esto) UANTAI Pca G Ee
dozens of other creatures and

monsters from both Ansalon and

the new continent of Taladas. Ninety-six
pages in all, plus four full-color Ce RUM ene lomClece
The three-ring binder holds these monsters, and has room for the
monster sheets from two more Monstrous Compendium
(iene

cea aa

crated
eed

ery

RUE airy

$20.00 US

 
