 

 

 

 

faXe Ve 1a) eX

Te alenree

 

 

| n¢ Edition

Monstrous Compendium

 

 

The first set of new monsters for your RAVENLOFI™ campaign!
 

 

 

TSR, TSR,
POB , Cherry H
Lake bridge CB1 3LB
WI 5 United Kingdo

 
 

Distributed to the book trade in the United States by Random House, Inc., and in Canada by Random House of Canada, Ltd.
Distributed to the book trade in the United Kingdom by Random Century Group and TSR, Ltd.

Distributed to the toy and hobby trade by regional distributors.

This material is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America. Any reproduction or other unauthorized use of the
material or artwork contained herein is prohibited without the express written permission of TSR, Inc.

TSR, Inc. TSR Ltd.
POB 756 1s 120 Church End, Cherry Hinton
Lake Geneva, Cambridge CBi 3LB
WI 53147 USA United Kingdom

© Copyright 1991 TSR, Inc. All rights reserved. Printed in the U.S.A.

ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS and AD&D are registered trademarks owned by TSR, Inc.
RAVENLOFT, BATTLESYSTEM and the TSR logo are trademarks owned by TSR, Inc.

2122
ISBN 1-56076-108-3

 
How To Use This Book

Welcome to the tenth Monstrous Compendium volume. Here we detail
the creatures unique to the RAVENLOFT™ game. As in previous volumes,
all entries are given in alphabetical order on removable loose-leaf sheets.
The loose-leaf sheets can be placed in a master binder for easy reference as
needed for an adventure.

Important Note: These monsters should not be intermingled with the
monsters from the previous volumes of the Monstrous Compendium;
keep these monsters together in a separate section of your binder.

All monsters included here are typical for their type; likewise, the en-
counter tables are guidelines for general play. Variations of your own de-
sign are encouraged. Those DMs unfamiliar with the world of the
RAVENLOFT game and its concepts will find a wealth of useful informa-
tion in the RAVENLOFT Boxed Set and the various RAVENLOFT mod-
ules.

Each entry includes the following information:

CLIMATE/TERRAIN defines where the creature is most often found. Cli-
mates include arctic, subarctic, temperate, and tropical. Typical terrain
includes plain/scrub, forest, rough/hill, mountain, swamp, and desert.

FREQUENCY is the likelihood of encountering a creature in an area. Very
rare is a 4% chance, rare is 11%, uncommon is 20%, and common is a
65% chance. Chances can be adjusted for special areas.

ORGANIZATION is the general social structure the monster adopts.
“Solitary” includes small family groups.

ACTIVE CYCLE is the time of day when the monster is most active. Those
most active at night may be active at any time in subterranean settings.
Active cycle is a general guide and exceptions are fairly common.

DIET shows what the creature generally eats. Carnivores eat meat, her-
bivores eat plants, and omnivores eat either. Scavengers eat mainly carri-
on,

INTELLIGENCE is the equivalent of human “IQ”. Certain monsters are
instinctively cunning; these are noted in the monster descriptions. Ratings
correspond roughly to the following Intelligence ability scores:

0 Non-intelligent or not ratable
1 Animal intelligence

2-4 Semi-intelligent

5-7 Low intelligence

8-10 Average (human) intelligence

11-12. Very intelligent

13-14 _—_—- Highly intelligent

15-16 peericeels intelligent
17-18

19-20 Supra geniu

21+ odlike intelligence

TREASURE refers to the treasure tables in the AD&D® Dungeon Masters
Guide. If individual treasure is indicated, each individual may carry it (or
not, at the DM's discretion). Major treasures are usually found in the
monster's lair; these are most often designed and placed by the DM. Intel-
ligent monsters will use magical items present and try to carry off their
most valuable treasures if hard pressed. If treasure is assigned randomly,
roll for each type possible: if all rolls fail, no treasure of any type is found.
Treasure should be adjusted downward if few monsters are encountered.
Large treasures are noted by a parenthetical multiplier ( * 10, etc.)—not
to be confused with treasure type X. Do not use the tables to place
dungeon treasure, as numbers encountered underground will be much
smaller.

ALIGNMENT shows the general behavior of the average monster of that
type. Exceptions, though uncommon, may be encountered.

NO, APPEARING indicates an average encounter size for a wilderness
encounter. The DM should alter this to fit the circumstances as the need
arises. This should not be used for dungeon encounters.

ARMOR CLASS is the general protection worn by humans and human-
oids, protection due to physical structure or magical nature, or difficulty
in hitting due to speed, reflexes, etc. Humans and humanoids of roughly
man-size that wear armor will have an unarmored rating in parentheses.
Listed AC do not include any special bonuses noted in the description.

MOVEMENT shows the relative speed rating of the creature. Higher
speeds may be possible for short periods. Human, demihuman, and hu-
manoid movement rate is often determined by armor type (unarmored

 

 

rates are given in parentheses). Movements in different mediums are ab-
breviated as follows: Fl = fly, Sw = swim, Br = burrowing, Wb = web.
Flying creatures will also have a Maneuverability Class from A to E.

HIT DICE controls the number of hit points damage a creature can with-
stand before being killed. Unless otherwise stated, Hit Dice are 8-sided
(1-8 hit points). The Hit Dice are rolled and the numbers shown are added
to determine the monster's hit points. Some monsters will have a hit point
spread instead of Hit Dice, and some will have additional points added to
their Hit Dice. Thus, a creature with 4 +4 Hit Dice has 4d8 +4 hit points
(8-36 total). Note that creatures with +3 or more hit points are consi

the next higher Hit Die for purposes of attack rolls and saving throws.

THAC0 is the attack roll the monster needs to hit armor class 0. This is al-
ways a function of Hit Dice, except in the case of very large, non-
aggressive herbivores (such as some dinosaurs). Humans and
demihumans always use player character THACOs, regardless of whether
they are player characters or “monsters”. THACOs do not include any
special bonuses noted in the descriptions.

NUMBER OF ATTACKS shows the basic attacks the monster can make in
a melee round, excluding special attacks. This number can be modified by
hits that sever members, spells such as haste and slow, and so forth. Mul-
tiple attacks indicate several members, raking paws, multiple heads, etc.

DAMAGE PER ATTACK shows the amount of damage a given attack will
make, expressed as a spread of hit points (dice roll combination). If the
monster uses weapons, the damage will done by the typical weapon will
be followed by the parenthetical note “weapon”. Damage bonuses due to
Strength are listed as a bonus following the damage range.

SPECIAL ATTACKS detail attack modes such as dragon breath, magic
use, etc. These are explained in the monster description.

SPECIAL DEFENSES are precisely that, and are detailed in the monster
description.

MAGIC RESISTANCE is the percentage chance that magic cast upon the
creature will fail to affect it, even if other creatures nearby are affected, If
the magic penetrates the resistance, the creature is still entitled to any nor-
mal saving throw allowed.

SIZE is abbreviated as: “T,” tiny (2' tall or less); “S,” smaller than a typical
human (2 + to 4’); “M,” man-sized (4 +’ to 7’); “L,” larger than man-sized
(7+' to 12'); “H,” huge (12 +' to 25’); and “G.” gargantuan (25 +').

MORALE is a general rating of how likely the monster is to persevere in
the face of adversity or armed opposition. This guideline can be adjusted
for individual circumstances. Morale ratings correspond to the following
2-20 range:

2-4 Unreliable

5-7 Unsteady
8-10 Average

11-12 = Steady
13-14 Elite

15-16 Champion
17-18 Fanatic
19-20 —_— Fearless

XP VALUE is the number of experience points awarded for defeating (not

neccessarily killing) the monster. This value is a guideline that can be
modified te the DM for the degree of challenge, encounter situation, and
for overall campaign balance.

Combat is the part of the description that discusses special combat abili-
ties, arms and armor, and tactics.

Habitat/Society outlines the monster's general behavior, nature, social
structure, and goals.

Ecology describes how the monster fits into the campaign world, gives
any useful products or byproducts, and presents other miscellaneous in-
formation.

Close variations of a monster (e.g. merrow, ogre) are given in a special
section after the main monster entry. These can be found by consulting the
index to find the major listing.
Encounters in Ravenloft

 

 

The environment (both mental and physical) in an AD&D®
game set in the dark domains of Ravenloft is not what it is in
TSR's other fantasy campaign settings. While this is apparent in
many places, it is perhaps most significant in the presentation of
monsters and similar encounters. Before we begin to present the
various monsters and minions of darkness that a party adventur-
ing in Ravenloft is likely to encounter, let's take a few moments to
go over some basic guidelines. By becoming familiar with these
guidelines and making them a part of each encounter, the
Dungeon Master will be better able to make the mysterious and
macabre world of Ravenloft come alive for his players.

Random Encounters

Traditional random encounters, in which the DM checks a va-
riety of tables periodically to determine if an encounter occurs
and exactly what the party encounters, really have no place in a
RAVENLOFT™ game. Nothing so simple as blind chance should
drive the course of an adventure in Ravenloft. Each encounter,
whether with man, beast, or monster, should be a premeditated
and carefully controlled part of the scenario.

This is not to say that random events can never be used in a
RAVENLOFT game—only that care must be taken and a little ex-
tra effort put into planning by the DM. It is perfectly all right to
orchestrate a handful of encounters ahead of time, set up a chart
to determine which one occurs with a given die throw, and then
check periodically to see if one turns up. In such cases, however,
each event should be a logical part of the scenario that has the ef-
fect of enhancing the game as a whole.

To illustrate this point, consider the following scenario: an el-
ven vampire has been stalking the land, and the party has been
trying to track it down and end a string of evil deaths attributed
to it. The DM sets up six random encounters and decides that one
will happen each day. A simplified encounter table might look
something like this:

Die Roll Encounter

1 Party finds body of new victim with clues to the lo-
cation of the vampire’s lair on the corpse.

2 Party finds diary that tells the story of the vampire's
origin and hints at some of his personality.

3 Minions of the vampire, aware that the PCs are track-
ing their master, attack the party while they sleep.

4 A wandering Vistani woman is discovered. She con-

sults the stars and provides the PCs with information
about the vampire’s weaknesses.

5 Party comes across a local citizen who remembers a
story his grandfather used to tell him. Using this in-
formation, the party can learn how to protect them-
selves from one of the vampire's special attacks.

6 PCs come across the vampire while it is attacking an-
other victim. The vampire is not interested in engag-
ing in a prolonged fight and flees the encounter after
only a brief skirmish.

As you can see, each of these encounters provides a random
event that serves a role in the evolution of the game. In addition,
the DM can prepare these encounters in advance, devoting the
time to make them each unique and interesting to the party. Thus,
these encounters become far more than a chance to trade blows
with some faceless monsters for no readily apparent reason.

 

A Typical Encounter

In the Forgotten Realms, for example, it might be perfectly all
right for a DM to describe an encounter to his players in terms
that are absolute and clear. Assume that a party in the Forgotten
Realms is travelling to Calaunt when the dice indicate a random
encounter. The Dungeon Master checks his tables quickly and
finds that the party has come across a pair of ogres. Thinking
quickly, he decides to present the party with a bridge that spans
the narrow river they have been following. A pair of ogres have
taken to robbing those who would use the bridge, and the party
will have to deal with them. The DM's description of the encount-
er might be as follows:

 

 

 

 

 

The intent of this scene is obvious: the party is being challenged
to either pay the toll demanded by the ogres or engage the mon-
sters in combat and win their way across the bridge by force of
arms. The scene plays no part in any greater adventure, but is a
well-presented and probably entertaining encounter that every-
one should enjoy (as it presents possibilities for both role-playing
and combat).

Further, there are enough descriptive elements in the text (the
silent birds, the cold water, etc.) to make the narrative seem fairly
vivid to most players. In short, the DM has done a perfectly fine
job of setting out for his players what they have encountered and
what they must do to get past it. For their part, the players under-
stand that they are faced with ogres and can decide on their
course of action based upon the relative wealth, strength, and
cleverness of their characters. A carefully calculated decision can
be made and play can proceed from there.

A Ravenloft Encounter

To repeat the example above, in a more “Ravenloftian” fashion,
assume that the party is investigating the disappearances of a
number of local farm families. The reason behind these strange
happenings is simply that an ancient curse on the newly cleared
lands they are farming has been triggered. The nature of the curse
is such that it has transformed these people into ogres and bound
them into the protection of the lands they would have exploited.
Thus, the party is again travelling down a path beside a river
when they encounter a pair of ogres.

 

 

 

 

 

 
Encounters in Ravenloft

 

 

 

 

 

Obviously, the second example goes into more detail than the
first one. The scene is largely the same, but the second is more
graphic and lavish in its particulars. Despite this, however, the
reader will note that it deprives the players of or clouds much fac-
tual information. Consider the following points:

1. The Environment: Note that both descriptions touch on the en-
vironment in which the encounter takes place. In each case, the
players are able to picture the area around them and use the infor-
mation presented to them in deciding how their characters will
act.

In the Ravenloft example, however, the environment becomes
more ominous and potentially threatening. Dark shapes drift be-
neath the surface of the water below the bridge—are they harm-
less fish or lurking horrors? The sun, which was so recently
shining brightly in the sky, has been covered by a dark cloud—is
magic involved? The crickets and birds have grown silent—is it
because of the ogres or is something else lurking in ambush?

By making the most of the description of the environment in
which an encounter takes place, the DM can inject a level of sus-
pense not normally found in AD&D® games.

2. The Mood: Notice that the mood in the first encounter is fairly
up-beat. The ogres are clearly a danger to be faced, but the scene
is presented in such a way as to elevate the party members to the
status of equals. That is, while the ogres are clearly dangerous
monsters, the characters are brave heroes who have the strength
and determination to stand against them.

In the Ravenloft example, the mood of the text is darker. The
party is presented with information in a way that makes it seem to
them that everything around them is more powerful than they
are. The ogres are described as hulking creatures with rippling
muscles and wicked fangs. An air of the supernatural hangs about
the scene that will make any party think twice before feeling too
cocky.

3. The Monsters: An observant reader will note that the word

    
      

a ae

be

 

      

      

“ogre” does not appear in the Ravenloft encounter. It's all well and
good to tell characters in a typical fantasy campaign that they are
fighting an ogre, since its a part of the everyday world they live
in. For adventures in Ravenloft, however, the DM must play up
the macabre and alien aspects of the supernatural. By describing
the monsters only as hulking humanoid creatures, the party is left
unclear as to what they are facing. Could these be hill giants? If
they are ogres, are they common ogres—might they not be ogre
magi? Maybe they're bugbears or some form of evolutionary
throw-back—or something altogether new and unknown? With-
out a solid base from which to draw conclusions about the nature
of their enemies, the party members will have to be careful about
their choice of tactics and weapons.

A side benefit of this use of descriptive text is that it prevents
the “rules lawyers” among us from instantly selecting the best at-
tack mode against a given creature. For example, everyone
knows to use burning oil and flame attacks against trolls. ADM
who describes such creatures in loose terms, playing up their su-
pernatural aspects, makes it far more difficult for the player to de-
cide that he is, in fact, faced with trolls and not some other
loathsome menace.

4, Potential Solutions: Lastly, the first scene makes it clear to the
players what is expected of them—they must battle the ogres or
forfeit their hard-won gold. The second presents no such hard
and fast solutions to the players. The players may well assume
that these beasts mean them no good, but can they be certain of
it? It could be that direct confrontation will rob the party of vital
information or place them in direct conflict with creatures far
more powerful than they are (remember, they aren't sure that
these are ogres).

By not handing out obvious solutions to the problems encoun-
tered, the DM leaves the players free to make their own decisions
and assumptions. Not only is this good role-playing, it can lead to
a far more exciting and challenging game. By never allowing the
players to have all the information they need, the DM is making
the world around them mysterious and uncertain.

Story Telling

Try to remember that a DM running a RAVENLOFT™ game is
under a special obligation to his players. While each and every
DM refereeing an AD&D game has accepted the challenge of en-
tertaining his players, the judge in a Ravenloft game must go be-
yond even that formidable task. To properly run a campaign in
Ravenloft, the DM must become a true story teller.

Mood and description are the keys to success here. While each
of the monsters in this book has been designed to make them fit
well into a gothic horror setting, they can easily be used too loose-
ly and freely—transforming them into nothing more than sword
practice for a party of adventurers. Conversely, almost any mon-
ster can be transformed into a horrifying nightmare with just a lit-
tle story telling by the DM. If kobolds are described as “a
cowardly, sadistic race of short demihumans,” it is easy to use
them for comedy relief or nuisance encounters. If, instead, they
are described as looking “twisted mockeries of children with cruel
eyes and snarling, dark voices,” they become far more interesting
and, potentially, horrific.

By keeping the points above in mind, the DM can go a long
way toward making each and every RAVENLOFT game session
an exciting one. Obviously, there are many other factors that
must be sewn together to make the unique fabric of the Ravenloft
gaming environment whole. The importance of properly present-
ing and using the monsters provided in this book may, however,
be the make-or-break point in an enjoyable campaign in
Ravenloft.

 
Ravenloft Encounter Tables

     
     

 

 

 

atl al fil Cyr pis

' 4 NL tte

Pee i

    

   
 

a xh tine °

 

   
 

 

Generic Monstrous Compendiums
(MC1 & MC2)

Bat (common)

Bat (large or giant)

Bat (huge or mobat)
Carrion Crawler
Doppleganger

Elf, Drow

Gargoyle

Ghost

Ghoul

Ghoul (lacedon)

Ghoul (ghast)

Golem, Lesser (flesh)
Golem, Lesser (clay)
Golem, Greater (stone)
Golem, Greater (iron)
Groaning Spirit (banshee)
Guardian Daemon (least)
Guardian Daemon (lesser)
Guardian Daemon (greater)
Hag (annis)

Hag (green)

Hag (sea)

Haunt

Hell Hound

Heucuva

Homonculous

Imp

Jackalwere

Lich

Lich (demilich)
Lycanthrope, Werefox (foxwoman)
Lycanthrope, Wererat
Lycanthrope, Werewolf
Mind Flayer

Mummy

Poltergeist

Rakshasa

Rat (common)

Rat (giant)

Shadow

Skeleton

Skeleton (animal)
Skeleton (monster)
Spectre

Vampire

Vampire (oriental)

Wight

Will o'wisp

Wolf

Wolf (worg or dire)

Wolf (winter)

Wolfwere

Wraith

Zombie

Zombie (monster)
Zombie (ju-ju)

Forgotten Realms® (MC3)
Claw, Crawling

Cloaker

Darkenbeast

Death, Crimson
Revenant

Web, Living

DragonLance® (MC4)
Beast, Undead (Stahnk)
Beast, Undead (Gholor)
Dreamshadow
Dreamwraith

Fetch

Fire Minion

Fire Shadow

Haunt, Knight

Imp, Blood Sea
Knight, Death

Spectral Minion
Warrior, Skeleton
Wichtlin

Yaggol

Greyhawk® (MC5)
Crypt Thing

Hound, Yeth

Kyuss, Son of
Necrophidius

Raven (Ordinary)
Raven (Huge)

Raven (Giant)
Scarecrow

Shadow, Slow
Wraith (Swordwraith)
Wraith (Soul Beckoner)
Zombie, Sea

Kara-Tur (MC6)

Buso (Tigbanua Buso)
Buso (Tagamaling Buso)
Chu-u

Con-tinh

Gaki (Jiki-ketsu-gaki)
Gaki (Jiki-niku-gaki)
Gaki (Shikki-gaki)
Gaki (Shinen-gaki)
Goblin Rat

Goblin Spider
Hannya

Hengeyokai (fox)
Hengeyokai (racoon dog)
Hengeyokai (rat)

Hu Hsien

Ikiryo

Kaluk

Krakentua

Kuei

Memedi

Oni (Common)

Oni (Go-Zu-Oni)

Oni (Me-Zu-Oni)
P’oh Gohei

Spirit, Stone
Yuki-on-na

Spelljammer® (MC7)
Ancient Mariner
Spiritjam

Outer Planes (MC8)

Baatezu, Lesser—Abishai
Baatezu, Least—Spinagon
Baatezu, Lesser—Barbazu
Baatezu, Lesser—Erinyes
Baatezu, Lesser—Hamatula
Baatezu, Least—Nupperibo
Baatezu, Greater—Pit Fiend
Baatezu, Greater—Amnizu
Baatezu, Greater—Cornugon
Baatezu, Greater—Gelugon
Baatezu, Lesser—Osyluth
Baatezu, Lemure

Bebilith

Bodak

Gehreleth

Githyanki

Githzerai

Hordling

Larva

Night Hag

Nightmare

Tanar’ri, Greater—Babau
Tanar’ri, Greater—Chasme
Tanar’ri, Greater—Nabassu
Tanar'ri, Guardian—Molydeus
Tanar’ri, Least—Dretch
Tanar'ri, Least—Manes
Tanar’ri, Least—Rutterkin
Tanar’ri, Lesser—Alu-Fiend
Tanar’ri, Lesser—Bar-lgura
Tanar’ri, Lesser—Cambion
Tanar'ri, Lesser—Succubus
Tanar’ri, True—Balor
Tanar'ri, True—Glabrezu
Tanar’ri, True—Hezrou
Tanar’ri, True—Marilith
Tanar’ri, True—Nalfeshnee
Tanar'ri, True—Vrock
Vaporighu

Yugoloth, Greater—Arcanaloth
Yugoloth, Greater—Nycaloth
Yugoloth, Greater—Ultroloth
Yugoloth, Lesser—Dergholoth
Yugoloth, Lesser—Hydroloth
Yugoloth, Lesser—Mezzoloth
Yugoloth, Lesser—Piscoloth
Yugoloth, Lesser—Yagnoloth

Spelljammer® (MC9)
Allura

Dreamslayer
Dweomerborn
Firelich

Skullbird

Spirit Warrior
Undead, Stellar

 
Bastellus

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Te ee
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any city or village
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Dream essences
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 0
MOVEMENT: Fl 15 (A)

HIT DICE: 4

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: Nil

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: M (6'tall)
MORALE: Unsteady (5-7)
XP VALUE: 6,000

The bastellus is a haunting, undead creature that comes in the
night to feed upon the dream energies of helpless sleepers. In
many cultures, it is known simply as a nightmare or dream
stalker.

The bastellus is seldom seen, for it only appears in the presence
of sleeping beings. Reports of the creature's true form, however,
have been gathered from those who came across one while it was
feeding. From these accounts, it is known that the bastellus looks
like a hulking humanoid shadow. Utterly featureless, it feeds by
placing its outstretched hand upon the victim's brow. When feed-
ing, it always has its head thrown back as if it were in ecstasy, for
the absorption of dream energy causes it great pleasure.

No recorded attempt to communicate with a bastellus has ever
succeeded, so its language (if any) is unknown to mortal man. It is
assumed, however, that a bastellus can impart messages to others
through manipulation of their dreams, for many incidents have
occurred in which previously unknown facts were available to
someone after a visitation from a bastellus.

Combat: The eerie and spectral nature of the bastellus makes it
largely invulnerable to physical harm. Only magical weapons of +3
or better can strike the creature, and even they do only half damage
to it. Like most undead, it is immune to charm, sleep, or hold spells.
Spells that depend on cold, heat, or electricity to inflict damage can-
not injure bastelli and, as they have no physical bodies, they are im-
mune to all manner of poisons. Holy water and the like cause no
damage to bastelli, but they can be turned (as if they were ghosts) by
powerful priests and clerics. A dispel evil cast directly a at bastellus is
the only sure way to destroy it, and even then it is allowed to a save
vs. spells to avoid annihilation.

The bastellus can move about in dimly lit or shadowy places
without detection 95% of the time. Even persons on their guard
for a dark form moving through the shadows have little hope of
spotting the horror—a percentage chance equal to the higher of
their Intelligence or Wisdom scores.

A protection from evil spell will prevent the bastellus from en-
tering a given area or attacking a given individual, but it is not
harmed by these spells. A negative plane protection spell is fully
effective against a bastellus and also breaks the creature of its de-
sire to feed again on the same victim (although it may do so out of
chance or proximity, it is no longer compelled to do so as de-

scribed below.)

 

 

If it desires to move into an area with awake beings in it, the
bastellus can employ a powerful sleep spell that affects all beings
within 50 feet. A saving throw vs. spells is permitted by those in
range, but this roll is made at a —4 penalty. This spell is so power-
ful that elves are only 30% resistant to it and half elves are only
10% resistant.

Once all of the persons in a given area are asleep, the bastellus
picks out a target and moves in to feed. Since the sleep it induces
in others is a magical and dreamless one, it does not attack those
who have been affected by its power. Thus, only someone who
was asleep before its spell was cast will be targeted. In addition,
the bastellus is unable to feed on the spirit essences of elves and
half-elves, so they are safe from its preying as well.

To attack, the bastellus moves close to its victim and reaches
out an arm to touch the target's brow. As soon as it makes con-
tact, the dreams of the sleeper become twisted. Whatever scene he
or she might have been imagining turns dark and evil. The only
common thread in these visions of terror is that they will be
drawn from the darkest part of the dreamer’s mind—the id—and
will reflect his or her greatest fears.

For example, if a paladin is worried about his chaste love for a
sweet princess and is dreaming of an evening rendezvous with his
cherished one, he might find that she has suddenly turned into a
sultry temptress. Her actions might be so alluring that in his
dream he cannot turn away from her, even though he knows that
to yield to her invitations spells certain doom. In the end, he is
forced to embrace the twisted mockery of his betrothed and his
soul seems to fade to absolute darkness.

When the dreamer awakes, he feels shaken and distraught. The
night's sleep proves to be unrestful, and the memory of the horrible
dream burns in his mind. No hit points are recovered from a sleep in-
terrupted by a bastellus, and the character will awake too disturbed
to be able to memorize new spells or perform any act of great mental
concentration. In addition, the victim will find that he has been re-
duced by one level due to the feeding of the dark creature.
Bastellus

Any being reduced to below level 0 by the preying of a bastellus
will die in its sleep, seemingly of a heart attack. If the body is not
destroyed (via cremation, immersion in acid, or similar means),
its spirit will rise in a number of days equal to the number of levels
it lost to the bastellus. Thus, a 14th level wizard would rise up in
two weeks. The new spirit is also a bastellus, but it has no connec-
tion with the monster that created it.

If caught unawares, the bastellus can be forced into actual
combat—although it will always try to flee from such confronta-
tions. In these cases, it is very limited in power, for its sleep spell
does not work on those who can see it. The creature has other
powers to enable it to escape in such cases, but they are not nearly
so fearsome as its energy draining dreams. The bastellus can in-
voke an area of darkness within 50 feet of itself (often to cover its
escape) and pass through any solid object without resistance.

As creatures of darkness, bastelli will shun brightly lighted ar-
eas. While their natural ability to create darkness is able to over-
come magical light sources of less than 3rd level (a normal light
spell, for example), it cannot darken an area illuminated by more
powerful spells. Thus, a continual light spell will provide enough
luminescence to prevent the bastellus from entering the lighted
area. Note that bright light does not harm the creature, but serves
to keep it at bay. Further, the presence of a bright light will not
prevent the bastellus from employing its sleep spell on those in the
illuminated area if it can draw near enough to them to do so.

Should the bastellus be forced to attack, it does so by moving
through a living being (requiring a normal attack roll to do so). If
the bastellus can do this, the victim must save vs. spells or be
driven into an extreme state of paranoia. The victim's compan-
ions become (to him) his greatest enemies, as drawn from his own
subconscious by the touch of the bastellus, and he will attack
them without mercy. Although these delusions last only 1d4
rounds, the chaos that usually ensues during this time provides
more than enough cover to allow the bastellus to escape.

If the bastellus is reduced to zero hit points but is not destroyed
by the casting of dispel evil, it will rise again to plague the world.
When the last blow is struck to the creature, it will seem to boil
away into nothingness like the cloud of steam rising above a pot
of boiling water. At the same time, it throws its head back and un-
leashes a telepathic cry of anguish and pain that causes all within
50 feet to make a fear check. If the creature was in contact with a
victim when it was struck down, the shock to the dreamer is so in-
tense that he or she must save vs. death or be instantly slain. On
the next night, the bastellus will rise again at the place where it
was first created to renew its dreadful preying.

The bastellus passes the day in a pocket dimension of shadows
and nightmares (see below). Because of the regenerative effects of
its slumber here, the creature is always returned to full hit points
before the coming of night and its return to the prime material
plane.

 

Habitat/Society: The bastellus is drawn to places where large
numbers of people dwell and, thus, dream. Because of this, it fre-
quently appears in cities and towns.

While in a given location, it seeks out those who have the most
vivid dreams. Usually, this includes highly passionate or moti-
vated individuals and those rare creative minds who can find true
freedom of expression only in their nightly flights of fantasy. Be-
cause these people tend to be the most extroverted and well
known persons in their area, their sudden and mysterious deaths
often cause quite a stir. Before long, it becomes all too clear that
some foul creature is stalking the citizenry and feeding on those
who provide its fire and life.

Once the bastellus has fed upon a given person's dreams, it be-
comes obsessed with that person and will return to taste his or her
essences nightly until the victim dies. As soon as this fate befalls
its chosen prey, the creature moves on in search of another ener-
getic mind upon which to feast.

As mentioned earlier, those who die from the preying of a bas-
tellus may well become one themselves. On the night that the dis-
embodied spirit returns from the dead, it feels a burning hunger.
Having no memory of its past life, the spirit knows only that it
must seek out the dreams, aspirations, and loves of others in or-
der to fill the void that aches within it. Before the night is done, it
must taste the dream essences of another or fade away, never to
return. Usually, this is not a problem as the victim probably died
in a city and the spirit will reappear at the site of its death.

The pocket universe in which the bastellus passes the day is be-
lieved to be associated with an unusual conjunction of planes.
Many luminaries have postulated that it must contain aspects of
both the negative material plane and the dreaded demiplane of
Ravenloft. As these creatures are encountered only in the latter
realm, such an explanation seems likely.

Ecology: There are those who would argue that the bastellus is a
creature from beyond the grave and, therefore, has no place in
the biology of the natural world. In fact, there is a great deal of
speculation that this is not the case. Numerous scholars have put
forth the theory that the bastellus is actually a product of the un-
recognized hopes and aspirations of living creatures. If this is
true, then the bastellus is very much a by-product of the living
world and at least nominally important to it. This debate has
raged for countless centuries, however, and it seems that the
scholars who put forth both arguments are no closer to a resolu-
tion of the issue than they were when the debate began.

The dream essences of the bastellus, while hard to obtain, are
of almost incalculable value to necromancers and illusionists in
the crafting of magical items. It is said that an illusionist who uses
even the tiniest fraction of such a creature's substance as a mate-
rial component in the creation of an illusion will find that the im-
ages they create are drastically more vivid than they might
otherwise be—making it almost impossible for victims to con-
vince themselves that they are not real.

 

 
Bat, Ravenloft

     
 
 
  
        

tu at a

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Sentinel Skeletal
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: = Any land Any land
FREQUENCY: Very rare Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night Night
DIET: Carnivore Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Avg (8-10) Non-(0)
TREASURE: Nil Nil
ALIGNMENT: Special Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1 2-12
ARMOR CLASS: 6 5
MOVEMENT: 3, Fl 18 (C) 1, Fl 15 (C)
HIT DICE: 1 1-1
THACO: 19 20
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4 (1d4) 1-3 (1d6/2)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below Nil
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil Nil
SIZE: Ta) T(1’)
MORALE: Fearless (20) Fearless (20)
XP VALUE: 65 65

Bats are more common in the dark realms of Ravenloft than they
are anywhere else in the known universe. All of the traditional
varieties of bat (common, large, giant, huge, mobat, and so
forth) are represented in one domain or another, but two distinct
species of bat are found only in Ravenloft.

A sentinel bat is a strange form of bat that is drawn to powerful
undead and serves them as familiars serve wizards. While they
look much like common bats, being roughly the same size and
coloration, they are often marked in some way by their masters.
Thus, a sentinel bat that is serving a vampire whose family crest is
a silver crown might develop a grey crown-shaped patch of fur.

The eyes of a sentinel bat are normally deep black, but when
their master wishes to see through them, their eyes glow like
pinpoints of fiery red light.

Through a series of clicks and ultrasonic whistles they are able
to speak with and command other species of common (or even
giant) bats. In this way, a single sentinel bat can provide its master
with a vast intelligence network composed wholly of bats.

Combat: Sentinel bats are unusual enemies. They seldom engage
in direct combat, preferring to flee any potentially dangerous
situation. Often, they will call upon other bats in the area and
command them to cover their escape. When they do attack, they
will swoop down upon a victim and bite them, inflicting 1d4
points of damage per successful attack. In addition, they have the
traditional powers of their masters available to them. Thus, a
sentinel bat who is serving a wight has the ability to drain 1 level
of life energy with each strike, is hit only by silver or +1 or better
magical weapons, and is immune to sleep, hold, and charm
spells. They never have the ability to create undead, however, so
any creature slain by a sentinel bat serving a wight would not rise
up as a wight themselves. The life energy drain (if any) of a
sentinel bat is less potent than that of its master, however; lost
levels are regained at a rate of 1 per day or by the casting of a
remove curse or atonement spell upon the victim.

Habitat/Society; Sentinel bats are to undead what familiars are to
wizards. When any free-willed, intelligent undead creature in
Ravenloft desires a companion, it can call upon the Mists to
deliver to it a sentinel bat. Such a request can be made but once
every decade, and only one bat serves an undead individual at
any given time. The request for a bat must be made near a bat lair

 

 

 

 

 

at midnight, on a night when the moon is full. During the next full
moon, the undead creature returns to the lair and one of the bats,
now transformed into a sentinel, will fly to join him. Thereafter,
the bat’s master can look through the eyes of its pet whenever it
desires and see what the bat sees. In all other regards, however,
the link between the two creatures functions as if the two were
linked by a find familiar spell. Because the death of a sentinel bat
can result in the death of its master, these creatures are seldom
sent into dangerous situations.

Ecology: Sentinel bats are normal creatures who have been
empowered by the Mists of Ravenloft. Like their mundane kin,
they have an acute natural sonar, keen eyesight, and subsist on a
diet of insects and such.

The body of a sentinel bat has been used with great success in
the creation of devices and potions intended to convey power
over the undead.

Skeletal Bat

Skeletal bats are created by the use of an animate dead spell and
are often associated with necromancers or evil priests. They are
to bats what traditional skeletons are to humans — mindless
animated remains.

Skeletal bats attack with their bony claws (inflicting 1-3 points
of damage) and are often used as guardians by those who create
them. In addition, they radiate an aura of fear that causes all
creatures who view them to make a fear check. A bonus of +1 is
allowed on the check for every 3 full hit dice that the victim has.
Thus, a 5th level character looking upon a skeletal bat is entitled
to a +1 on his fear check.

Skeletal bats are nothing more than puppets who will obey
simple instructions given to them by their creator. These cannot
be overly long (two or three concepts is the most one of these
monsters can understand) and must be very clearly worded.
Because of this, their tasks are usually quite simple.

The bones of skeletal bats can be used in the creation of bone
golems (described elsewhere in this book).

 

 

 
Bowlyn

   
   
   

Raven ar Fi
Jey (
‘

   
  

ee ie >
heal ee TT TL

‘i

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any ocean or sea
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Special
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 10
MOVEMENT: 18

HIT DICE: 4+3
THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6 (1d6)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: M (6’ tall)
MORALE: Fearless (20)
XP VALUE: 975

The bowlyn (or sailor's demise, as it is often called) is a strange
and dreadful spirit that haunts ocean-going vessels. In many
ways, the creature has been likened to a poltergeist or similar rest-
less spirit that haunts the place of its death.

Like the poltergeist, a bowlyn is typically invisible. Unlike the
former, however, it can become visible when it wishes to. When
visible (or invisible and viewed by someone who can see such
things), the bowlyn appears as a gaunt and skeletal seaman. Al-
though the creature's features are torn and twisted by the trauma
of its death, it is often possible for those who knew it in life to rec-
ognize their former shipmate. Such individuals are entitled to an
Ability Check on Wisdom to see if they can identify their former
companion. Those who do are instantly required to make a hor-
ror check and may, at the DM's discretion, be called upon to make
a fear check as well.

Bowlyn do not communicate with the living in any way, al-
though they do constantly moan and wail in agony as they seek to
exact vengeance upon those they blame for their deaths.

Combat: Bowlyn generally engage only in indirect combat. When
they do opt to use their deadly touch in melee, however, it inflicts
1d6 points of damage and causes the victim to save vs. paralysis
or instantly be overcome with nausea. Individuals so affected suf-
fer a —4 penalty on all attack rolls, saving throws (including fear
and horror checks), and proficiency checks until they are cured
with any form of healing magic. Any healing spell, even one as
minor as goodberry or cure light wounds will remove the nausea
from the character.

When a bowlyn chooses to attack through indirect means, it
generally does so by causing accidents aboard the ship on which it
died. These accidents will often begin as minor mishaps (a se-
cured line coming loose or damage to a minor navigational in-
strument) and gradually grow into severe hazards (the crow’s nest
breaking free with a sailor in it or the destruction of all naviga-
tional charts). More often than not, the latter stages of a bowlyn
haunting result in men being hurled overboard to die by drown-
ing (see the Player's Handbook for rules on this).

The bowlyn can be successfully attacked only with magical
weapons or spells. It has the traditional spell immunities associ-
ated with undead and cannot be affect by charm, sleep, hold, or
similar spells. Because it is not solid, spells that are meant to bind
a physical form (like web) will not affect it. Bowlyn are immune
to the damaging effects of holy water, but can be turned as if they

 

    
  
 
    

+

ee
es =a

|

 

\ a
‘ :

“4 ~*~.
y oh
1 My
were ghasts by priests or similar characters.

Because the bowlyn is a spirit tied directly to the sea, it can be
destroyed without combat by any captain wise (or foolish)
enough to run his ship aground while the bowlyn is haunting the
vessel. In such cases, the creature is instantly annihilated and the
mysterious accidents it has been causing will cease. Of course, if
the bowlyn learns that a captain or crew mean to do this, the
spirit will take action to prevent it.

Over the course of its “visit” to the ship, the creature will stage
one mishap per night. If possible, it will arrange accidents similar
to the one in which it died, or incidents related to its former duties
on the ship, Thus, a bowlyn that was once a navigator might ar-
range for a fire in the ship's chart room.

On the last night of its haunting, the bowlyn will attempt to
sink, cripple, or destroy the ship. In order to spread fear and
panic among the crew, the bowlyn will arrange for those near the
scene of an accident to catch fleeting glimpses of its being.

Habitat/Society: Bowlyn are undead spirits who, like the polter-
geist, do not rest easily in their graves. Without exception, they
were sailors on ocean-going vessels who died due to an accident
at sea. In life, they were cruel or selfish persons; in death they
blame their shipmates for the mishap that took their lives. Thus,
they return from their watery graves to force others beneath the
icy waves.

Typical hauntings do not occur immediately after the death of
the sailor fated to become a bowlyn. It takes the spirit of the sea-
man from 1-10 years to return from the grave. The first appear-
ance of a bowlyn always takes place on the anniversary of its
death and the haunting lasts for 1-6 weeks.

Ecology: The bowlyn is a dangerous creature. Since it exists only
to torment those it blames for its death, it has no place in the natu-
ral world. While the accidents arranged by a bowlyn often affect
persons it never knew in life, the focus of its attacks will always
be those it served with prior to death.

 

 

 

 
Broken Ones

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Common Greater
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any land Any land
FREQUENCY: Rare Very Rare
ORGANIZATION: Pack Pack
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any (night) Any (night)
DIET: Varies Varies
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7) High (13-14)
TREASURE: I,K, M I, K, M (Z)
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: 3-12 (3d4) 1-4 (1d4)
ARMOR CLASS: 7 (10) 5 (8)
MOVEMENT: 9 9
HIT DICE: 3 5
THACO: 17 15
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6 (or by 1d8 (or by

weapon) weapon)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Regeneration Regeneration
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil Nil
SIZE: M (4-7’tall) M (4-7' tall)
MORALE: Unsteady (5-7) Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 175 420

Broken ones (or animal men) are the tragic survivors of scientific
and magical experiments gone awry. While they were once hu-
man, their beings have become mingled with those of animals and
their very nature has been forever altered by the shock of this
event. It is rumored that some broken ones are the result of failed
attempts at resurrection, reincarnation, or polymorph spells.

While broken ones look more or less human, they are physi-
cally warped and twisted by the accidents that made them. The
characteristics of their non-human part will be clearly visible to
any who see them. For example, a broken one who has been in-
fused with the essence of a rat might have horrific feral features,
wiry whiskers, curling clawed fingers, and a long, whip-like tail.

Broken ones know whatever languages they knew as human
beings and 10% of them can communicate with their non-human
kin as well. It is not uncommon for the speech of a broken one to
be heavily accented or slurred by the deformities of its body.

Combat: Broken ones tend to be reclusive creatures and combat
with them is rare. Still, they are strong opponents. Broken ones
are almost always blessed with a greater than human stamina, re-
flected in the fact that they always have at least 5 hit points per
Hit Die. Thus, the weakest of broken ones has at least 15 hit
points. In addition, broken ones heal at a greatly accelerated rate,
regenerating 1 hit point each round.

A broken one will often wield weapons in combat, inflicting
damage according to the weapon used. Many broken ones have
also developed claws or great strength, which makes them deadly
in unarmed combat. Hence, all such creatures inflict 1d6 points of
damage in melee. Unusually strong strains might receive bonuses
to attack and damage rolls.

Many broken ones have other abilities (night vision, keen hear-
ing, etc.) that are derived from their animal half. As a general
rule, each creature will have a single ability of this sort.

Habitat/Society: Broken ones tend to gather together in bands of
between 10 and 60 persons. Since they seldom find acceptance in
human societies, they seek out their own kind and dwell in se-
cluded areas of dense woods or rocky wastes far from the homes
of men. From time to time they will attack a human village or car-
avan, either for supplies, in self-defense, or simply out of venge-
ance for real or imagined wrongs. If possible, they will try to seek

 

 

 

out their creator and destroy him for the transformations he has
brought upon them.

When a society of these monsters is found, it will always be
tribal in nature. There will be from 10-60 typical broken ones
with one greater broken one for every 10 individuals. The greater
broken ones (described below) will act as leaders and often have
absolute power over their subjects.

Ecology: Broken ones are unnatural combinations of men and an-
imals. Their individual diets and habits are largely dictated by
their animal natures. Thus, a broken one who has leonine charac-
teristics would be carnivorous, while one infused with the essence
of a horse would be vegetarian. There are no known examples of
a broken one who has been formed with the essence of an intelli-
gent nonhuman creature.

Broken ones do manufacture the items they need to survive.
These are seldom of exceptional quality, however, and are of little
or no interest to outsiders. Occasionally, broken ones may be
captured by evil wizards or sages who wish to study them.

Greater Broken Ones

From time to time, some animal men emerge who are physi-
cally superior. While they are still horrible to look upon and can-
not dwell among men, they are deadly figures with keen minds
and powerful bodies. Their twisted and broken souls, however,
often lead them to acts of violence against normal men.

These creatures regenerate at twice the rate of their peers (2 hit
points per round) and inflict 1d8 points of damage in unarmed
combat, When using weapons, they gaina +3 to +5 bonus on all
attack and damage rolls. Like their subjects, they often have spe-
cial abilities based on their animal natures. Such powers, how-
ever, are often more numerous (from 1-4 abilities) and may be
even better than those of the animal they are drawn from. For ex-
ample, a greater broken one who is created from scorpion stock
might have a chitinous shell that gives it AC 2 and it might have a
poisonous stinger.

 
Bussengeist

   
   

  
   
 
 

 

 

WB vil Pe | th K iP
i beat ET

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: N/A
MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: N/A
THACO: Special
NO. OF ATTACKS: N/A
DAMAGE/ATTACK: N/A
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Despair
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below
SIZE: M (6’ tall)
MORALE: Fearless (20)
XP VALUE: 0

A bussengeist is the spectral form of someone who died in a great
calamity brought on by their own action or inaction. They look
much like they did in life, save that they are partially transparent.
Over time, the gloom and suffering that the spirit is forced to wit-
ness takes its toll and the features of the creature become sad and
tired. Thus, these harbingers of doom often appear far older than
they were at the time of their death.

The bussengeist is a ghost like creature that finds itself drawn to
scenes of great disasters or tragedies. With a slow, sad pace, it
walks the countryside travelling from crisis to crisis. As a rule,
the bussengeist does not cause the disaster to occur, but is drawn
to it for some reason. Once present, however, the aura of despair
that surrounds the creature can certainly make an already bad sit-
uation worse.

Bussengeists are able to communicate with those around them
via a limited form of telepathy. More often than not, however,
they will convey only gloomy tidings of impending doom, not in-
formation that might be used to avert the coming catastrophe.

Combat: Bussengeists do not engage in combat directly. Their lot
in life (or death, as the case may be) is simply to witness time and
time again the type of disaster that killed them.

When a bussengeist arrives to view a scene of destruction, it ra-
diates an aura of despair. This aura will affect only one side in a
battle, generally the side most akin to “good.” All creatures with-
in 120 feet of the bussengeist suffer a penalty of —4 on all attack
and damage rolls, saving throws, and proficiency checks. Other
die rolls may be negatively affected as well, at the DM's option.
The effects of this aura can be avoided by characters who make a
successful save vs. spells.

While a bussengeist cannot be harmed by physical weapons, it
may be confronted, driven off, and even destroyed by some
spells. Attempts to turn undead, however, will prove fruitless.

A bussengeist can be forced away from a place by a wizard or
priest who employs a control undead, holy word, limited wish,
or dismissal spell. A bussengeist driven away in this manner will
return in 2-12 hours, however, and will be immune to further
casting of the same spell by the same wizard. The forbiddance
spell can be cast to prevent a bussengeist from entering a given ar-
ea for the duration of the spell.

While these means will serve to provide temporary protection
from the bussengeist, destroying one is another matter entirely. The
only way to annihilate a bussengeist is with a wish or dispel evil.

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Bussengeists are solitary wanderers. Unlike the
typical nomad or vagabond, however, they have no control over
their movements. They are constantly drawn from tragedy to
tragedy and forced to witness scenes of destruction similar to that
which ended their own lives. As a rule, only those persons who
feel remorse for their actions will become bussengeists. For exam-
ple, a traitor who allowed an invading force to gain access to a
walled city and was himself slain in the ensuing battle might be-
come a bussengeist. If he was killed without warning and felt no
pity for those his actions had brought misery to, he would not be
transformed. If, on the other hand, he knew that he was about to
die and had reason to feel that he had acted in error, he might well
become a bussengeist. In his afterlife, he would visit cities in the
process of being raided by barbarians, castles being overrun by
monsters, and similar scenes.

Bussengeists travel from place to place in an insubstantial,
though not invisible, state. Once they reach the place they are
forced to travel to, they begin to radiate their aura of despair.
Once the catastrophe that drew them has occurred, they will feel
a need to move on. Walking with a slow, methodical stride they
will seek out another place where a tragedy is about to unfold.

Bussengeists generally arrive at the scene of a disaster 1-6 days
before it is to occur. Thus, the inhabitants are given some warn-
ing that a crisis is at hand (if they are wise enough to recognize the
tragic, spectral figure of the bussengeist for what it is).

Ecology: Being an unnatural creature, the bussengeist has no real
place in the ecology of the world it has left behind. The same is
not true, however, of the course of history. There are many
scholars who can point out great battles which, they claim, can
only have been decided by the influence of these tragic souls.

The essence of these creatures, if captured in some way, can be
a powerful magical component. It is rumored that many cursed
magical weapons are forged in fires fanned by the breath of a bus-
sengeist and that their powers are harnessed in the creation of
drums of panic or a harp of discord.

 

 

 
Darkling

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any land
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)
TREASURE: J, K, M, (A)
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 8 (10)
MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 2

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4 (or by weapon)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: _See below

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: M (6’)
MORALE: 9
XP VALUE: 420

The darkling is a member of the Vistani (see the RAVENLOFI™
Boxed Set) who has been cast out from his people. No longer tied
to the fabric of the demiplane in the same way that he once was,
the darkling becomes more and more evil with the passing of
time. In the end, he or she is utterly corrupted by the gloom of the
surrounding land.

Darklings look much like their distanced Vistani cousins, save
that their skin tends to be even darker and they are almost
uniformly gaunt. Their features are sunken and worn, making
them look as if they had been far too long without nourishment.
They dress much like other Vistani, save that they lose their taste
for bright colors and tend to wear drab earth tones.

Darklings want as little to do with true Vistani as possible, but
often prey on normal men and their societies. They speak the
common tongue of men and are generally familiar with a handful
(3 to 6) other languages or dialects.

Combat: The darkling still clings to a portion of the power that
was once his. As such, he is a dangerous and clever opponent.
Perhaps the most important of his abilities is that of foreseeing.
Because the darkling has an innate sense of what his enemies are
about to do, he is never surprised and makes all saving throws
automatically. In addition, the darkling imposes a -2 penalty on
all opponents’ surprise rolls. For this reason, the darkling often
strikes from ambush.

In melee combat, the darkling will generally rely on light arms
like daggers and short swords, doing damage according to the
weapon employed. The use of lethal poisons on bladed weapons
is a darkling trademark, however, so those who suffer even a
minor scratch from a darkling blade may be in deadly peril. The
toxin created by darklings is similar to type E poisons (injected,
immediate, death/20) and they will share the secrets of its
creation with no one. It is rumored that even the Vistani cannot
duplicate the poisons of their distanced kin.

If a darkling attains surprise when it attacks someone, it will
often employ its evil eye. This curse is a variant on the traditional
Vistani enchantment and causes its victims to suffer a -2 on all
attack rolls and saving throws unless they save vs. spells.

Habitat/Society: Having been cast out of the Vistani society for
some crime or wrongful act, the darkling often gathers a band of
human thugs around him and takes up a life of heinous crime and

 

 

wandering brutality. While they are unable to cross the misty
borders between the domains of Ravenloft, a darkling is said to
know every stone and tree in the domain he dwells in. This
imprisonment in a single domain is quite painful to a people as
full of wanderlust as the Vistani and serves to fuel the evil desire
for vengeance that burns in the darkling’s heart.

Often, a darkling will work toward some grand scheme which
he feels will allow him to escape from the domain he is imprisoned
in (or even from Ravenloft itself) and strike back at his former
people in some way. Since the Vistani are in far better harmony
with the environment than their darkling outcasts, such plans of
vengeance are seldom anything but failures.

Darklings often claim to retain more of their fortune telling
powers than they truly do. Predictions offered by them, however,
are either lies or educated guesses.

Ecology: The darkling lives either alone or as the leader of a small
band of thugs and ruffians. He looks upon the Vistani as cruel
people who have done him wrong and upon normal men as
pawns and objects of prey. To the darkling, the world has
committed a great wrong and now owes him a great debt. Thus,
he looks upon all material things as his rightful property and
takes what he needs without regard for the consequences of his
actions,

The death of a darkling usually (90%) draws the attention of
the nearest Vistani group. Within a week, they arrive at the
location of the demise, bury the body (if such is still available),
and perform an ancient rite designed to soothe the spirit of their
tortured brother and allow him to rest in eternal peace. If this
ritual is not completed, there is a 90% chance that the darkling
will return in 1-6 weeks as a ghast (if the body is intact) or as a
wraith (if the body has been destroyed). This undead creature
will then hunt down those men who served it in life and kill them,
transforming them into ghouls (if the darkling returns as a ghast)
or wights (if it is a wraith). Thus, its evil band will again plague
the lands.

 
Doom Guard

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any castle or ruin
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1-6
ARMOR CLASS: 2
MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 5

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d8 (by weapon)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: M (6! tall)
MORALE: Fearless (20)
XP VALUE: 2,000

Originally nothing more than a suit of armor, the doom guard is
now an animated creature similar in nature to a golem. Created
by a series of arcane enchantments, these frightening automatons
are often used as guards in the castles and towers of those who
create them. Doom guards are found in both western and eastern
(oriental) styles as well as a variety of others.

Doom guards never speak and, thus, have no language of their
own. They are able to obey simple commands from their creator,
but these are generally limited to one or two rudimentary con-
cepts. Typical orders include “stay in this room and attack any-
one but me who enters” or “kill anyone who opens this chest until
I tell you otherwise.”

Combat: The doom guard is an unsubtle and straightforward op-
ponent. When their instructions call for them to engage in com-
bat, they simply move toward their intended target and strike
with their weapons. Subtle planning can often enable a party to
outwit doom guards without having to battle them one-on-one.

Most doom guards are armed with some manner of sword, axe,
or bludgeon. In almost every case their blows with these weapons
will inflict 1-8 (1d8) points of damage. In rare cases (about 1 in
10), they are equipped with heavier or lighter weapons (50%
chance of either) and can inflict 1d10 or 1d6 points of damage re-
spectively.

Doom guards are not undead, although they are often mis-
taken for creatures of this type. They cannot be turned or affected
by spells that are intended for use against the living dead (control
undead, etc.)

Spells such as charm, hold, sleep, or other mind affecting mag-
ics have no power over doom guards because of their mindless
nature. Similarly, the fact that they are not true living beings
makes them immune to spells that depend on biological function
(cause light wounds or cause blindness, for example). For like rea-
sons, poisons do not harm them.

Heat- and cold-based attacks inflict only half damage to doom
guards, with successful saving throws (when applicable) indica-
ting that no harm is done. Lightning- or electricity-based spells in-
flict full damage when used against these unnatural foes. A
transmute metal to wood or crystalbrittle spell is instantly fatal to
doom guards, transforming them and destroying the delicate bal-
ances of the spells that keep them animated.

 

 

 

 
      

a
)

  

 

 

 

Moet
Habitat/Society: Clearly, doom guards are not natural creatures
and have no society. They dwell only in those places where they
have been created and stationed and have no means of reproduc-
ing themselves.

Ecology: The creation of a doom guard is an interesting process,
for it runs contrary to the idea of an “enchanted suit of armor.”
The reason for this is simply that the suit of armor is never actu-
ally subjected to a spell cast directly upon it. Rather, the doom
guard is fashioned using an enchanted anvil of darkness, and it is
this device that gives the creature its magical aura.

The first step in the creation of an anvil of darkness is the build-
ing of the anvil itself. The raw materials used in the creation of
this object must be attained from the body of a slain iron golem.
When the anvil is cast, it must have either a scarab versus golems
(of any type) or a pristine, unread manual of golems set at its
heart. Before the hot metal of the anvil cools, it must be enchant-
ed by a powerful wizard. The first step in this enchantment is the
weaving of an enchant an item spell over the anvil to make it
ready for further wizardry. A fabricate spell is cast next, in order
to the give the anvil the creative essence that will be so important
to it in later years. Subsequently, a binding spell is employed to
capture the last essences of the spirit that once animated the anvil
in its iron golem form. Finally, a permanency spell is used to bind
these magics into a single, cohesive enchantment that will enable
the anvil to carry out its function.

Once the anvil of darkness is created, it can be used by a skilled
armorer to create one doom guard every 20 weeks. Once work on
a specific doom guard is begun, the armorer must work at least 8
hours out of 24 on his creation. Work cannot be halted or delayed
for any reason or the enchanting process fails.

 

 

 
Doppleganger Plant

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Doppleganger

Plant Podling
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any warm, Any warm,

temperate land temperate land
FREQUENCY: Very rare Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Patch Band
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any
DIET: Special Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Genius (17-18) Genius (17-18)
TREASURE: Nil Varies
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: lor2 1- 20
ARMOR CLASS: 10 (vines) Varies

or 6 (pods)
MOVEMENT: Nil Varies
HIT DICE: 11 to 18 Varies
THACO: Nil Varies
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 Varies
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 0 Varies
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Mind bondage Varies
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below Varies
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil Varies
SIZE: G (10'wide/hp) M (6'tall)
MORALE: Fanatic (17-18) Fanatic (17-18)
XP VALUE: 25,000 Varies

The origins of this horrific plant are utterly unknown, as is much
important information about it. The reasons for this are numer-
ous, but center around the difficulty of coming into contact with
the creature to study it and living to record one’s observations.

In appearance, the doppleganger plant looks much like any of a
variety of melon-bearing crops. It spreads out in a tangle of vines
and broad, glossy leaves. Scattered throughout its mass are a
number (1 per Hit Die) of pods, each measuring between four and
eight feet long. These pods are the source of the wicked creature's
intelligence. They also serve as its main form of self defense as
they are able to dominate the minds of others and make them
serve the plant's will.

The doppleganger plant cannot communicate with those it
does not control, but is able to instantly exchange information
and instructions with those it has taken over. In this manner, the
doppleganger plant knows and experiences all that its minions do
and see.

Combat: The doppleganger plant itself is unable to attack or de-
fend itself except with its unusual mind bondage power. Thus, in
physical combat, it depends on its minions to fight for it.

Doppleganger plant patches are unusually resistant to fire and
lightning, suffering only half damage from all flame- or
electricity-based attacks. Cold-based attacks do normal damage,
as do most other forms of magical attack. Weapons employed
against the plant's vines and leaves inflict but 1 point of damage
per successful attack roll, but those directed against the pods
themselves inflict normal damage.

Only 20% of the creature's hit points are represented by the
tangle of vines and leaves that makes up the majority of its mass.
The remaining hit points are divided evenly between each of its
pods. Destruction of all the hit points in the vines does not kill the
plant, but gives it the appearance of being slain. Conversely, de-
struction of the pods without the elimination of the vines and
leaves will not kill the plant either. Thus, many doppleganger
plants that are left for dead eventually sprout up again, to reap
their harvest of horror anew.

 

 

 

Once each round, the doppleganger plant can attempt to use its
mind bondage power on any sleeping or unconscious creature
within a 1 mile per Hit Die radius of its patch. The intended vic-
tim is located via mystical means and the plant need not be able to
see its target; neither does the plant have to be aware of its vic-
tim’s existence prior to the use of this power. Although this power
may be employed any number of times per day, only one new
slave may be obtained in a given 24 hour period. Thus, once the
plant has taken control of another creature, it cannot dominate a
second being for at least one full day.

The mind bondage power of the doppleganger plant acts much
like a combined trap the soul and domination spell. Victims of the
mind bondage attack are entitled to a saving throw vs. spells to
avoid its affects. Success indicates that they have escaped the in-
fluence of the doppleganger plant but are aware that something
evil has just tried to attack their minds. Elves and half-elves have
the same resistance to this power that they do to charm spells as
do all other races with similar defenses. Those who fail their sav-
ing throws become podlings (see below). Once a being becomes a
podling, it can go anywhere (even crossing over to another plane
or existence) and still be in instant contact with and under the ab-
solute control of the plant that created it.

A podling is created when the life force of a being under mind
bondage is drawn into one of the plant's pods, where it remains
until that pod is destroyed. The number of hit points that a given
pod has is determined as described above, and any pod that is de-
stroyed will release the soul trapped within it. Freed spirits will at-
tempt to return to their bodies, This can be done only if the body
has not been slain or destroyed and requires the character in ques-
tion to make a resurrection survival check. This counts toward
the number of times a character can be resurrected and is handled
in all ways as if it were an actual resurrection attempt. A success-
ful return to the body leaves the character dazed and helpless for
roughly one hour while he throws off the effects of the imprison-
ment.

 
Doppleganger Plant

Habitat/Society: Doppleganger plants are found only in warm,
moist climates and generally appear after some form of prediction
of doom (usually an inauspicious comet or meteor shower) has
shown itself in the heavens. The connection between these two
events has never been fully understood.

The doppleganger plant seems to feed upon its podlings and
thus is constantly seeking new ones to enslave. Because there is no
range restriction on the plant's power to control its minions, it
will often send them abroad in an effort to lure more victims into
its grasp. It is not unknown for whole towns to fall beneath the
shroud of evil that one of these creatures spreads.

In cases where more than one plant is encountered, they will of-
ten cooperate. These highly intelligent creatures have never been
known to turn against each other, despite their foul alignments. A
pair of doppleganger plants working in concert will often use
their agents in seemingly conflicting roles to keep potential vic-
tims off balance until they can be defeated.

Doppleganger plants have been know to allow some of their
minions to be destroyed without true resistance. In much the
same way that a masterful chess player will sacrifice a pawn to
take a more valuable piece, the doppleganger plant will often ar-
range for one of its lesser minions to be lost in order to improve
the position of one of its other puppets. (“Don't be silly, Derodd
can't be a podling—she's the one who discovered that two of the
town guards were acting under mind bondage, remember?”)

Ecology: Doppleganger plants sustain themselves by drawing
away the vital essences of their podlings (see below). They re-
quire nothing else (not even sunlight or water) to survive. Their
appearance only in warm and temperate regions remains a mys-
tery, but may be linked more to reasons of comfort than environ-
mental need,

The sap from a doppleganger plant's vines as well as the flesh
from the inside of its pods have both proven to be useful in the
creation of magical potions and devices that influence the minds
of others in some way. In many cases, the latter material results in
the creation of magical powers twice as great as those found in de-
vices crafted with other materials. Thus, a potion of human con-
trol created with the heart of a doppleganger pod allows the
imbiber to control a total of no less than 64 levels or Hit Dice
worth of humans or demihumans.

Podlings

These tragic creatures are the victims of a doppleganger plant's
mind bondage spell. In addition to providing the plant with nour-
ishment at the cost of their own life essences, podlings also act as
the plant's eyes and hands. Although podlings are mentally domi-
nated by the plants they serve, their actions are in no way stiff or
unnatural. Any casual observer will almost certainly assume that
there is nothing unusual about the podling.

 

 

 

 

A podling retains all knowledge and abilities it had in its pre-
vious existence, but now serves the needs of the doppleganger
plant exclusively. It is no longer alive in the sense that it once was.
Any basic medical check will reveal that there is no respiration
(except as needed to speak or smell), no heart beat, and no re-
sponse of the pupils to light. Similarly, podlings have no need (or
desire) to eat, drink, or sleep. It is through these differences that
they are most often found out when they move among men.
However, the average person has only a 10% chance per hour
spent with the podling of noticing anything amiss about it. Even
then, only those who knew the individual before it was enslaved
have a chance of detecting something specifically wrong. (“De-
rodd didn’t want any chocolates? Strange, I've never known her
to turn one down before.”)

In addition, podlings usually weigh far less than they did when
they were “alive.” This factor can be accidentally or purposefully
discovered by those with whom a podling comes into contact.
Starting 24 hours after it has been placed under mind bondage by
the doppleganger plant, a podling will begin to waste away. They
will lose 1d4 hit points a day as the plant feeds upon their es-
sences. This wasting occurs at the center of the body and gradu-
ally works its way outward with all manner of tissues, bones, and
bodily fluids being consumed. When the podling finally dies from
the feedings of its master, it will be nothing more than a hollow
shell of flesh with some muscle tissue and subcutaneous fat. The
creature gradually becomes lighter as more and more of its mass
is absorbed by the plant. Thus, for every 25% of its hit points lost
to the plant, the podling weighs 20% less than it did before its
transformation. A 200 pound man would, therefore, be reduced
to a shell weighing only 40 pounds (20% of its original weight)
when it finally died.

Anyone fighting a podling with a slashing or piercing weapon
has a 5% chance per hit point inflicted upon it of noticing that
there is something unusual about the creature. Following that,
there is a 10% chance per point of damage inflicted on subsequent
rounds of discovering that the podling is partially hollowed out.
If the attacker has no reason to suspect that this is the case, he will
be forced to make a horror check as soon as the truth about the
creature is uncovered. Any examination of the corpse of a pod-
ling who has been killed with such weapons will instantly reveal
the nature of the beast.

When called upon to defend the doppleganger plant, the pod-
ling will not hesitate. It draws upon all of the knowledge and
power it had prior to its transformation (including spells, special
abilities, or familiarity with the enemy's tactics, weaknesses, and
capabilities) to defeat the enemies of the plant. Thus, the actual
statistics used for an individual podling will vary greatly. Most,
however, are ordinary men, women, and demihumans who have
fallen under the influence of the evil doppleganger plant.

Podlings will often lure unsuspecting victims within range of
the plant's mind bondage spell. They will then attempt to knock
the victims unconscious or convince them to sleep so that new
podlings can be created.

 
Elemental, Ravenloft, General Information

 

 

Ravenloft elementals are not dissimilar to their more mundane
cousins. However, they are created because of an unusual interac-
tion between the Mists of Ravenloft and the fabric of the elemen-
tal planes. Thus, they tend to absorb some of the dark aspects
common throughout the land and take on an aura of the macabre
not found in elementals elsewhere.

Unlike true elementals, those formed in conjunction with the
mists have no native plane to return to when their tasks in
Ravenloft are done. The essences that animate them, however,
are found in the mists that surround the dark domains of
Ravenloft. Like true elementals, they can exist outside of the
mists only in a shell of material drawn from the environment into
which they are summoned,

Asa rule, elementals are not very intelligent. They are aware,
however, that they have been snatched away from their normal
lives and forced into physical shells to do the bidding of another
creature. As such, they are foul-tempered and violent when en-
countered and will seek, if possible, to avenge themselves upon
their summoner (see below).

Combat: All Ravenloft elementals share a number of common
features, many of which apply to combat situations. First, they
are harmed only by magical +2 or better weapons. Similarly,
creatures with fewer than 4 Hit Dice and no magical abilities are
unable to harm an elemental in any way. Thus, a band of goblins
would be helpless to fend off the attacks of an elemental unless
they had access to a +2 or better weapon.

Unlike normal elementals, Ravenloft elementals are not held
off by spells like protection from evil that ward off extraplanar
creatures, for they are on their own plane in Ravenloft. In addi-
tion, the fact that many spells intended for use against elemental
creatures function differently in Ravenloft than they do in other
realms makes these creatures doubly difficult to overcome.

All elementals are immune to attacks that draw on their basic
natural element to inflict damage. Thus, a pyre elemental (which
is a variant fire elemental) is unharmed by spells like fireball, and
a grave elemental would remain unharmed by a transmute rock
to mud spell.

Summoning an Elemental:

There are three ways by which an elemental can be called into ex-
istence (conjured) by a wizard. These are detailed in the basic Ele-
mentals entry and will not be repeated here. The following
information, however, supersedes the data presented earlier and
applies only to the conjuration of elementals in Ravenloft. Much
of this information is collected from various points in the
RAVENLOFI™ Boxed Set.

The Dark Powers of Ravenloft restrict the free travel of planar
creatures into and out of their domain. Thus, any attempt to sum-
mon a traditional elemental (air, earth, fire, or water) has a 20%
chance of creating a Ravenloft elemental instead. If the materials
needed to form such a creature are not close at hand, the Dark
Powers provide them. Ravenloft elementals summoned by acci-
dent cannot be controlled by their conjurer and will be free-
willed, angry forces when they arrive. For additional information
on this, see “Controlling an Elemental” below.

Although most appearances of Ravenloft elementals are the re-
sult of a failed attempt to conjure a traditional elemental, this is
not always the case. A specific attempt to conjure a Ravenloft ele-
mental is possible, provided the caster has the materials required

to form the creature's shell (soil from a grave, a funeral pyre,
etc.). In fact, it is only through the purposeful summoning of a
Ravenloft elemental that such a creature can be controlled by its
conjurer. Such deliberate uses of the Dark Powers of Ravenloft
require a Ravenloft Powers check by the summoner, with the
level of the check (1-5 % ) being determined based on the purpose
for which the summoned creature is used.

In all other ways, the process of conjuring an elemental in
Ravenloft is similar to that employed outside of the dark domain.

Controlling an Elemental:

As stated in the basic elemental entry, absolute concentration is
required to control a summoned elemental. In Ravenloft, how-
ever, it is even more difficult to control elementals than it is in
other planes. Because of this, all conjured elementals receive a
saving throw versus spells at -2 to escape control on the round
that they arrive in Ravenloft. If this spell fails, they are not al-
lowed another unless a new person tries to take control of them
(see below). Ravenloft elementals that are conjured by accident
are automatically uncontrolled (or free-willed).

A free-willed elemental will use its first action to attempt a re-
turn to its home 25% of the time. Otherwise, it will attack the
character that conjured it. Since escaping from Ravenloft is not
easy, those elementals who attempt to leave instantly will fail and
will then turn on their creator as well.

Spells like dismissal or banishment do not work the same way
in Ravenloft that they do in other domains. The exact effects of
these and other spells are described in the RAVENLOFT Boxed
Set, but it should suffice to say that they are seldom able to send a
summoned elemental out of Ravenloft.

In all other ways, control of elementals is handled the same
way that it is in other realms. The exception to this, obviously, is
that a summoned elemental cannot return to its home plane (as
most will do after no more than 3 rounds of combat). Trapped in
Ravenloft, they will do everything in their power to destroy those
who brought them into that place.

A Ravenloft elemental that is successfully controlled will, of
course, break free of the caster’s influence at the end of the dura-
tion of a conjuration spell. Since it is unable to return to its home
at this time, it will become free-willed (see below).

Stealing Control of an Elemental:

This is handled just as it is with normal elementals, save for one
thing. Any successful attempt to break another's control of an ele-
mental allows it to make a new saving throw (albeit with a -2 pen-
alty) to avoid the control of its new master.

Free-willed Ravenloft Elementals:

A free-willed Ravenloft elemental will seek to destroy the one
who created it, for only by so doing can it be freed from servi-
tude. As soon as the conjurer is slain, the Ravenloft elemental dis-
sipates, ending any threat it might pose to others. If the
summoner flees the area, it will find itself stalked by the monster
until one or the other is destroyed. Because of the bond created
between the two beings at the time of the summoning, the elemen-
tal will always know the location of its intended victim and can
follow him no matter where he goes or what wards he erects
around himself.

 
Elemental, Ravenloft

 

 

 

oe

 

 

 

 

 

 

Pyre Blood Mist Grave
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any Ravenloft land Any Ravenloft Any Ravenloft Any Ravenloft Gravey
FREQUENCY: Very rare Very Rare Very rare Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary Solitary Solitary Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any Any Any
DIET: Special Special Special Special
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7) Low (5-7) Low (5-7) Low (5-7)
TREASURE: Nil Nil Nil Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Neutral Neutral Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1 1 1 1
ARMOR CLASS: 0 0 0 0
MOVEMENT: 12 12 Fl 36 (A) 6
HIT DICE: 8, 12, or 16 8, 12, or 16 8, 12, or 16 8, 12, or 16
THACO: 8 HD: 13 8 HD: 13 8 HD: 13 8 HD: 13
12 HD: 9 12 HD: 9 12 HD: 9 12 HD: 9
16 HD: 5 16 HD: 5 16 HD: 5 16 HD: 5
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 1 1 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 3d8 3d6 2-20 (2d10) 4-40 (4d10)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below See below Infuse evil Sink
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below See below See below See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil Nil Nil Nil
SIZE: 8 HD: L (8' tall) 8 HD: L (8’ tall) 8 HD: L (8' dia) 8 HD: L (8' tall)
12 HD: L (12’ tall) 12 HD: L (12' tall) 12 HD: L (12' dia) 12 HD: L (12' tall)
16 HD: H (16' tall) 16 HD: H (16’ tall) 16 HD: H (16 dia) 16 HD: H (16' tall)
MORALE: 8 HD: Champion (15-16) 8 HD: Champion (15-16) | 8 HD: Champion (15-16) 8 HD: Champion (15-16)
12 HD: Champion (15-16) 12 HD: Champion (15-16) 12 HD: Champion (15-16) 12 HD: Champion (15-16)
16 HD: Fanatic (17-18) 16 HD: Fanatic (17-18) 16 HD: Fanatic (17-18) 16 HD: Fanatic (17-18)
XP VALUE: 8 HD: 3,000 8 HD: 3,000 8 HD: 4,000 8 HD: 3,000
12 HD: 7,000 12 HD: 7,000 12 HD: 8,000 12 HD: 7,000
16 HD: 11,000 16 HD: 11,000 16 HD: 12,000 16 HD: 11,000
Pyre Elementals spells or have a portion of his own blood drawn forth from his

The wild and dancing pyre elemental is drawn from the flames of

a funeral pyre or some large burning associated with a burial rite.

A pyre elemental appears as a slender column of intense flame

tendrils of fire licking away from it like the waving arms of a
ancer.

Combat: A pyre elemental attacks those it encounters with un-
matched savagery, taking delight in the destruction and death it
causes. Anyone who is struck by one of the lashing streams of
fire that it wields whip-like in combat suffers 3d8 points of dam-
age. Their armor (including shields and magical items of protec-
tion) must make saving throws vs. magical fire. Suits of armor
that fail their saves have their armor class reduced in effective-
ness one step. Thus, a suit of brigandine armor that fails its sav-
ing throw is reduced from AC 6 to AC 7. Shields and magical
devices that improve the wearer's armor class which fail their
saves are destroyed.

Blood Elementals

A blood elemental can be called forth only from a large quantity
of blood or from water drawn from the lungs of drowned men.
Because of the difficulty in obtaining these materials, they are the
rarest of the Ravenloft elementals.

Blood elementals appear as roughly humanoid creatures com-
posed entirely of blood. They leave a trail of drying blood on the
ground behind them and fill the air around them with the smells
of salt and iron. A pair of fluid tentacles whip about the creature
and allow it to manipulate objects and attack enemies.

Combat: A blood elemental will attack in one of two ways. The
first, and most common means of attack is a blow from one of its
tentacles. Each such strike inflicts 3d6 points of damage. Further,
the victim of such an attack must make a saving throw versus

body and added to that of the elemental. The amount of blood
lost in this way is equal to the damage done by the initial blow.
Thus, an attack that inflicts 12 points of damage is followed by a
potential blood drain that inflicts an additional 12 points of dam-
age. Hit points lost to the blood drain are added directly to the
elemental's own hit point total (to a maximum of 8 hit points per
Hit Die). When striking at a target that has no blood of its own (a
golem, say), the blood elemental cannot employ its blood drain
attack and suffers a -2 penalty per die on all damage rolls (to a
minimum of 1 point per die).

In any round that the elemental chooses not to attack, it may
attempt to smother an opponent. To do so, the elemental makes a
normal attack roll to hurl itself onto the target of the attack. If it
succeeds, the victim of the attack must make a saving throw ver-
sus death or find that the elemental has filled his nose, mouth,
and lungs with blood. The victim of this attack has a very good
chance of drowning (as described in the AD&D® Player's Hand-
book). On the next round, the elemental is free to move away
from this victim and attack another character, leaving the first
target for dead. Attacks on the elemental while it is smothering
do full damage to the elemental and half damage to the victim
- is unable to lash out at the elemental while being smoth-

).

Curiously, although they are a variant on water elementals,
blood elementals are unable to enter or cross open water. If
forced into such a situation, they begin to dissipate—suffering
1d10 points of damage per round—until such time as they break
contact with the water.

Mist Elemental
A mist elemental is a relative of the traditional air elemental who
has been formed from the essences of the Ravenloft Mists them-

 
Elemental, Ravenloft

 

 

selves. Once conjured, the mist elemental appears as a drifting
cloud of white vapor that looks like nothing more than a patch of
fog. Because of this, a mist elemental that is moving about in a
region of fog or mist is treated as if it were invisible.

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
    
      
 

Combat: When a mist elemental chooses to attack, it does so with
its chilling, evil touch. Moving with a speed one would never ex-
pect from a being that seems to drift about at the mercy of the
wind, the elemental moves toward (and then through) its target.
In so doing, the creature has the ability to employ one of two
attack modes. The first is a simple, straight-forward attack that
inflicts 2d20 points of damage from the creature's chilling pres-
ence.

In lieu of inflicting damage, however, the mist elemental may
seek to infuse evil into the victim. When it does so, the creature
seems to enter the body of the victim and then pass on through it
without harm. However, anyone subject to such an attack must
save vs. spells or have their alignment shifted to chaotic evil. In
addition, a character who has been infused is also charmed by
the elemental and will not act against it. The elemental may not
infuse evil twice in a row. That is, it may not infuse evil again +»
until after it attacks and attempts to inflict damage. This attack
may be against the same character or another one. All of the nor-
mal penalties associated with an involuntary alignment change

    

)
are in effect following an attack by a mist elemental. In order to di ala | KB
regain their original alignment and break the charm upon them, t tf +A eo
infused characters must receive a rernove curse spell cast by an el ff! y \ Ja
individual of their true alignment. ‘B} ff Yf a ar pte
: Yo £44 AA A OTS
Grave Elemental dO, 4 We Sts

The grave elemental is a variant earth elemental that is drawn
from the soil of a graveyard or similar resting place of the dead. It
appears as a towering, man-shaped mass of earth with bones and
the shattered remnants of coffins protruding from it.

 

Combat: A grave elemental cannot travel through water, but can
move effortlessly through earth and stone. It often uses the latter
ability to allow it to lurk beneath the surface of the ground while
would-be victims draw near. When they are right above it, it ex-
plodes upward and attacks, imposing a —4 penalty on all sur-
prise rolls made by its adversaries.

When grave elementals engage in combat, their preferred
means of attack is simply a blow from their mighty fists. The
damage they inflict with such an attack is dependant on their
size, with 8 HD elementals delivering 4d8 points of damage, 12
HD elementals delivering 4d10 points of damage, and the mas-
sive 16 HD elementals inflicting a crushing 4d12 points of dam-
age.

Grave elementals are less effective when striking at targets who
are air- or waterborne. Obviously, they cannot employ their sink
power (see below) against such creatures and any physical dam-
age they inflict on them is reduced by 2 points per die (to a mini-
mum of 1 point per die).

In lieu of attacking with brute force, they may employ a magi-
cal power that functions as the sink spell of a wizard whose level
is equal to their Hit Dice. They may cast this spell but once per
hour and may only use it against creatures or objects standing on
an earth or stone surface. Although this is an innate power and
has no casting time or components, the elemental is unable to
undertake any other action in the round that it attempts to sink
an opponent.

Grave elementals share the earth elemental's ability to lash out
at buildings with earthen or stone foundations. Their attacks
against such structures can be devastating and are far more effec-
tive than those made by other creatures of similar power due to
the elemental's affinity for the building materials used.

 

 

 
Ermordenung

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: — Any Borca
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)
TREASURE: W (I)
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 10
MOVEMENT: 15

HIT DICE: 4

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: Special
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (6' tall)
MORALE: Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: 650

The ermordenung are a dark and evil people found almost exclu-
sively in the domain of Borca. Here, they act as elite agents who
serve Ivana Boritsi, the ruler of that dread domain. On rare occa-
sions, they are sent on missions outside of Borca to further the in-
terests of their mistress.

Ermordenung appear as normal human beings of surpassing
beauty. The men are tall, normally no less than six feet in height,
and smoothly muscled. They seem to radiate an inner power
from their finely set classical features. The women are tall, often
only an inch or two shorter than the men, and have the perfect
features that every artist tries to create. Both sexes are marked by
raven hair and penetrating dark eyes that, it is said, are almost
hypnotic. Their complexion, however, is rather more pale than
that common to most of the people in Borca and contrasts greatly
with their dark hair and eyes.

The ermordenung speak the common language of the people of
Borca. Their dialect, however, is marked by an aristocratic man-
ner and they carry themselves with a noble bearing that sets them
apart from all but the ruling family.

Combat: In combat, an ermordenung will attempt to grasp an ex-
posed area of flesh on an opponent's body so that their deadly
touch can do its work. Any successful attack roll indicates that
the target has been touched and must save vs. poison (witha +4
bonus on their roll). The effects of the ermordenung toxins are felt
within seconds—those who fail their saves are instantly slain,
while those who succeed suffer 10 points of damage.

If the attack roll is a natural 20, the ermordenung has managed
to get a firm grip on his enemy. In such cases, the victim must
make a saving throw vs. poison (with no modifiers). While fail-
ure to save still results in death, success indicates that 20 points of
damage are inflicted. If the target is unable to pull free of the grip
(see below), they will be subject to the same saving throw each
round until they are slain or they escape.

In non-combat situations, the ermordenung will often use their
great physical beauty and overwhelming charisma to lure would-
be victims of the opposite sex close. Once their victims are at ease,
they draw them into a deadly embrace and slay the hapless souls
with their toxic kiss. Victims of this “kiss of death” are entitled to
a saving throw vs. poison (with a -4 penalty to their die roll). As
usual, failure indicates instant death. Success, on the other hand,
indicates that the victim suffers 30 points of damage. Those who

 

 

 

 

survive this horrid attack may attempt to break free of the em-
brace (see below), but will be kissed again on the next round if
they fail to do so.

Breaking the grasp or embrace of an ermordenung is very diffi-
cult, for they are considered to have an 18/90 strength if male or
an 18/50 strength if female. Weaker enemies must make a saving
throw versus paralysis (with a -4 penalty to their roll) in order to
pull away from their attackers. Those of equal strength need only
make the saving throw itself, while those who are stronger than
the ermordenung must save with a +4 bonus to their roll.

Ermordenung are immune to nearly all forms of toxins them-
selves. The only variety to which they have no natural resistance
is that of their peers—any ermordenung is as vulnerable to the
deadly touch of their kind as a normal man.

Habitat/Society: The ermordenung live as members of the ruling
elite in Borca. They seldom mix with “the common folk” unless
acting on behalf of their mistress, Ivana Boritsi.

The fact that the ermordenung cannot touch another living
creature without causing it to whither and die causes them endless
heartache. They have been forever denied the physical
pleasures—the caress of a lover's hand, the embrace of a close
friend, the affectionate hug of a child—that mean so much to
mortal men. Their inner suffering and agony has been marshalled
to make them cruel and heartless agents who carry out the orders
of Ivana Boritsi without question.

Ecology: The ermordenung are normal humans who have been
transformed, at the command of Ivana Boritsi, mistress of Borca,
into nightmarish creatures. The process by which these creatures
are created is dark and mysterious, but is believed to be so brutal
to its subjects that only the most physically fit can survive it. Be-
cause of her own passionate nature, Ivana Boritsi selects only the
most physically beautiful of her people for the “honor” of trans-
formation.

 

 
Ghoul Lord

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any land
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night
DIET: Corpses
INTELLIGENCE: High (13-14)
TREASURE: Q, R, 5, T, (B)
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 4
MOVEMENT: 15

HIT DICE: 6

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: = 1d6/1d6/1d10
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (6’ tall)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 3,000

It is hard to imagine a more frightening creature than the dreaded
ghoul lord. Lurking in places thick with the stench of death, the
ghoul lord feasts upon the flesh of living and dead alike, often sur-
rounding itself with a band of lesser undead that obey its every
command,

The ghoul lord looks much like the common ghoul or ghast. It
retains some semblance of its human form, but its skin has turned
the sickly grey of rotting meat, its tongue has grown long and
rasped, and its teeth and nails have become sharp and wicked in-
struments ideal for rending flesh and cracking bone.

Ghoul lords can speak the languages they knew prior to their
death and transformation into the undead. When commanding
their ghoul and ghast minions, however, they do not speak, but
employ a telepathic sense that defies mortal languages.

Combat: The ghoul lord looks so much like a ghoul that it is 90%
likely that it will be mistaken for such a creature even by those fa-
miliar with the undead. The true nature of these beasts becomes
apparent, however, as soon as they spring into combat.

When a ghoul lord strikes with its long, cruel claws it inflicts
1d6 points of damage with each blow that lands. In addition, it
can also bite with its deadly teeth, scoring 1d10 points of damage
with each hit. Those hit by the creature's claws must save vs. pa-
ralysis or become unable to move for 1d6+6 rounds. Even elves
are not immune to this effect.

The bite of a ghoul lord causes the victim to contract a horrible
rotting disease unless a saving throw vs. poison is made. Those
afflicted with this illness will lose 1d10 hit points and 1 point from
their Constitution and Charisma scores each day. If either ability
score or their hit point totals reach 0, the person dies. If the body
is not destroyed, they will rise as a ghast on the third night after
their death. In such a state, they are wholly under the command
of the creature that made them until such time as that horror is de-
stroyed. At that point, they become free-willed creatures.

The rotting disease can be cured by nothing less than a heal
spell. Once the progression of the disease is halted, the victim's
Constitution score will return to its original value at the rate of 1
point per week. Their Charisma, however, will remain at its re-
duced level because of the horrible scars this ailment leaves on
both body and soul.

Like other undead of their ilk, ghoul lords are immune to the ef-
fects of sleep and charm spells. They are not harmed by holy wa-

 

 

 

 

 

ter or contact with holy symbols, but can be turned as if they
were 7 HD monsters. Ghoul lords are immune to damage from all
but magical weapons or those forged of pure iron. A circle of pro-
tection has no effect on these creatures unless cold iron is used in
its casting. Even then, the ghoul lord has a 10% chance per round
of overcoming the effects of the spell and striking freely at those
allegedly protected by it.

Ghoul lords do not radiate the foul odor associated with
ghasts, but they do fairly reek of evil. In fact, this effect is so po-
tent that those of good alignment suffer a —4 on all attack rolls
when within 30 feet of these creatures. In addition, all persons
who are forced to make a fear or horror check because of an en-
counter with a ghoul lord must do so with a —2 penalty on their
die roll because of the creature's evil nature. A remove fear spell
will negate the effects of this foul aura.

Habitat/Society: The ghoul lord is a foul creature found, thank-
fully, only in the demiplane of Ravenloft. It tends to dwell in iso-
lated places rife with the odor of death; graveyards and ruins are
its favorite haunts.

Ghoul lords always have a following of lesser undead with
them. These minions act under telepathic command from the
ghoul lord and are absolute in their loyalty to him. A ghoul lord's
band will consist of 2-12 (2d6) ghasts, each of which commands 2-
8 (2d4) ghouls.

Ecology: Ghoul lords are unique to the demiplane of Ravenloft. It
is rumored that they were first created at the hands of an insane
necromancer in some other dimension, but that they were so evil
as to instantly draw the attention of the Dark Powers. The Mists
of Ravenloft absorbed all of the existing ghoul lords and scattered
them across the domains.

There are those who insist that the necromancer has also been
transported to Ravenloft and that it is his twisted soul that rules
the Nightmare Lands. Of course, no proof of this has ever been
found.

 
Goblyn

    

<) ATES

That Sy

   
  
    

  

  

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Servant
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivorous
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: 3-24 (3d8)
ARMOR CLASS: 4
MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 4+4
THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2orl
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d6/1d6 or 2d6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Special
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 10%

SIZE: M (4-6')
MORALE; Special/Fearless (20)
XP VALUE: 975

Goblyns are hideous creatures with slightly bloated heads, point-
ed ears, and glowing red eyes. They have long, mangy hair which
grows only on the back of their head and necks. About half of
their face is taken up with a wide mouth full of needle-sharp teeth.

These creatures are formed by powerful evil magical items and
spells which transform humans into these twisted beings. This
transformation causes them to become very evil and totally sub-
missive to their master's every whim.

Goblyns have a telepathic link with their master and, through
him, with all of the other goblyns he controls.

Combat: Goblyns are very nimble creatures causing a —2 adjust-
ment to their opponent's surprise roll. Furthermore, when a
goblyn is unexpectedly encountered, it will suddenly flash its
teeth and leer at its opponent's face in a terribly frightening man-
ner. A fear check is required the first time this is encountered. In
any event, this action causes a — 4 penalty to surprise. Those sur-
prised will be so stricken with fear that they will be unable to
move that round.

Goblyns seldom attack with weapons. Instead, they strike at
their victim's throat with their clawed hands. Each successful
claw attack inflicts 1d6 points of damage. If both of their claws
hit, the goblyn is assumed to have gotten a solid hold on the tar-
get's neck. On each subsequent round, the victim will be bitten
(usually in the face) for an additional 2-12 (2d6) hits. In addition,
the victim will have difficulty breathing and must make a saving
throw versus spells or suffer an additional 1d4 points of suffoca-
tion damage. Both of these attacks are assumed to be automatic
hits. The goblyns refer to this as “feasting,” and it is so frightening
to observe that all who see someone attacked in this manner must
make a horror check.

 

 

 

 

In addition, for every 10 points of feasting damage done, the
victim will suffer a permanent —1 adjustment to their Charisma
due to facial scars and deformities.

Any attacks made by someone who has a goblyn at his throat
suffers a —3 penalty on all attack or damage rolls and saving
throws. Others who are striking at a goblyn which is “feasting”
gain a +2 on their attack and damage rolls while its attention is
focused on its victim.

Goblyns are similar to undead creatures in that they never
check morale.

All goblyns have the ability to move silently (80%), hide in
shadows (70%), and climb walls (25%). They have infravision
which functions at a range of 90 feet.

Habitat/Society: Goblyns are totally controlled by their master’s
desires. If they are told to attack another of their kind, they will
do so without pity. They never instigate combat on their own, but
eagerly leap to the attack if challenged or instructed to do so.
Goblyns have no apparent desires other than to fulfill their mas-
ter’s every whim with an emotionless devotion.

Goblyns do not sleep, tire, or become bored. Furthermore,
they can go for a considerable amount of time without food or
drink

Ecology: Goblyns are strict carnivores. They will eat only freshly
killed meat, in addition to drinking the blood of their victims.

Goblyns are often sought after by certain wizards and priests,
for they are useful as components in spells and magical items that
control humans.

 

 
Golems, Ravenloft, General Information

 

 

Golems are automatons created by the use of powerful magics. In
Ravenloft, there are varieties of golem unknown in other lands.
The reason for this is simple enough to understand. While all
common golems are animated by elemental forces, Ravenloft go-
lems are given life by the Dark Powers of Ravenloft. Thus, they
are inexorably tied to the land and are unable to exist in any other
realm.

Background

The origin of the first golems created in Ravenloft dates back to
a time when the land itself was young. Their story is tied to the
“lives” of two of Ravenloft's most powerful lords.

In the land of Barovia, Azalin (the current lord of Darkon) was
engaged in magical studies under the yoke of Strahd Von
Zarovich. At Strahd’s command, he was examining a number of
Strahd’s minions—undead zombies and skeletons—who had
been slain in mysterious ways. Strahd demanded to know who
had done this and by what means. Azalin was able to give Strahd
the information he wanted, but also learned something more. He
found that there was some essence of life left in these fragmentary
remains.

For the next several weeks, Azalin locked himself away in his
laboratory, experimenting with powers he had never dealt with
before. When Strahd sought him out and demanded to know
what he was working on, Azalin answered honestly (if incom-
pletely) and said that he had found something unusual in the mys-
tical fabric of this demiplane that needed more study. Strahd,
satisfied that this work was related to Azalin’s assigned duties of
finding an escape from Ravenloft, bade him continue and left the
lich to his work. Azalin never related to Strahd the fact that he
had learned how to create two new species of golem using the es-
sences of Ravenloft.

When Azalin assumed his place as Lord of Darkon, he brought
with him the knowledge of these new possibilities. Although he
now found it impossible to learn new magical spells, he had al-
ready laid out the process required to create his new breeds of go-
lem. Before long, he had produced the first zombie and bone
golems ever created in the land.

In the years since that time, others have learned the secrets first
unearthed by Azalin and used them to create new golems. Each of
them is unique to Ravenloft and all require the creator to make a
mystical pact with the Dark Powers that, for many, has led to
their final demise.

Common Characteristics

There are eight know varieties of Ravenloft golem, each of
which has its own powers and weaknesses. While these are de-
scribed in detail on the following pages, they all share some com-
mon characteristics.

Ravenloft golems can be damaged in combat only by magical
+2 or better weapons. They are immune to all manner of mind or
life affecting spells (such as charm, sleep, hold, or finger of death)
and cannot be harmed by poisons of any sort. They are all vulner-
able to the effects of a dispel magic. If the caster of such a spell is
equal to the level of the golem’s creator, then the monster will col-
lapse, seemingly dead, and be inanimate for a number of turns
equal to the caster's level. A detect magic cast on a “stunned” go-
lem will reveal that it still has an aura of power about it and that it
is gradually growing stronger as the monster “recharges” itself. If
the caster of the detect magic is of a higher level than the golem’s
creator, however, the golem falls inanimate and is slain.

Lastly, the creation of any Ravenloft golem requires such close
contact with the Dark Powers, that a Dark Powers check is re-
quired for each month of research into or actual work on the fash-
ioning of such a creation.

Theory

The creation of any manner of Ravenloft golem is a dark and
dangerous process for the creature’s master, The creature must be
created with loving care and special magical spells woven over
the body to bring it to life. The exact materials and magics re-
quired to create each type of golem are detailed below.

As with traditional golems, those fashioned with the aid of the
Dark Powers of Ravenloft have a great hatred of all living things.
They are kept in check only by the will of their creator, who faces
death at their hands if they ever escape his domination and be-
come free-willed creatures. While the spells used to create the go-
lem usually enslave it so that it cannot refuse to obey its creator,
there is a 10% chance that any Ravenloft golem will break free of
that control. Thereafter, it will devote all of its time and energy to
the destruction of its creator. Once a golem is created, it is entitled
to a saving throw vs. spells once per month (on the full moon).
Failure indicates that it must serve for another month, while suc-
cess indicates that it has become free-willed.

The rituals to animate the body (once it has been built) require
one full month (from full moon to full moon) and cannot be inter-
rupted in any way or the entire enchantment process must be
started anew. In all cases, the spells used may come from any
source (including devices or scrolls). If a spell is cast on behalf of
the golem’s creator by a second individual, that spell must con-
tain special alterations to make it sympathetic to the creature's
would-be master. There is no additional cost for these alterations.

Bone Golem

Only powerful wizards (of at least 18th level) can create these
evil creatures. The body of a bone golem is assembled wholly
from the bones of animated skeletons who have been defeated in
combat. Any manner of skeletal undead will do, from traditional
skeletons to Strahd skeletons, but all must have been created and
slain in Ravenloft. Only 10% of the bones from any given skele-
ton can be used, so the final product is a compilation of bones
from many creatures. Often, there will be animal, monster, and
human bones in the same golem, giving the creature a nightmar-
ish appearance.

Various spell components, costing a total of roughly 25,000
gold pieces, must be acquired and are consumed by the assembly
process. The following spells are woven over the body: animate
dead, symbol of fear, binding, and wish.

Doll Golem

Only a priest of at least 15th level can create a doll golem.
These creatures resemble a child's toy—often a baby doll or
stuffed animal. Bone golems can serve as either the guardians of
children or as murdering things too foul to contemplate.

Construction of the doll’s body takes only two weeks, but the
cost of components and enchanted elements of the golem reaches
15,000 gold pieces. The spells needed to complete the animation
are imbue with spell ability, Tasha's uncontrollable hideous
laughter, (un)holy word, bless, and prayer.

The first known examples of this type of golem turned up in the
land of Sanguinia in the hands of a travelling priest. While his
name has been lost to memory, it is believed that he researched
and built the doll to protect his wife and daughter as they trav-
elled around this dark land. History does not record the final fate
of that pilgrimage. It is rumored that the doll survived and still
haunts the realms of Ravenloft today, but there is no solid evi-
dence that this is the case.

 

 
Golems, Ravenloft, General Information

Gargoyle Golem

This creature is fashioned in the image of a real gargoyle and is
often placed as a warden atop buildings, cathedrals, or tombs. It
is most similar to the stone golem, save that is built only by
priests of at least 16th level. The body must be carved from a sin-
gle slab of granite (weighing 3,000 pounds and taking 2 months to
complete) and prepared with components costing 75,000 gold
pieces. Of this money, 15,000 gold pieces is used to create vest-
ments which can be reused, so a second golem could be created
for only 60,000 gold pieces. The spells required to complete the
process are bless, exaction, (un)holy word, stone shape, conjure
earth elemental, and prayer.

The first gargoyle golem was fashioned at the command of
Vlad Drakov, Lord of Falkovnia, as a means of defending his cas-
tle. Eventually, the secret of their construction leaked out and
others began to build them. It is rumored that none of these crea-
tures can attack Drakov, and even that they may all secretly serve
him. This may or may not be true. Although none can report ever
having seen Drakov challenged by such a creature, it seems un-
likely, however.

Glass Golem

Fashioned by either priests or wizards (of at least 14th level),
the glass golem is composed entirely of stained glass. Perhaps the
most artistic of all the known Ravenloft golems, its creation takes
3 months and requires an outlay of 100,000 gold pieces. In addi-
tion to the materials required, the following spells must be used:
glassteel, animate object, prismatic spray, rainbow, and wish.
Because of the mixture of spells, this type of golem is usually built
by multi- or dual-classed characters or with the aid of a powerful
assistant.

While the origins of some types of Ravenloft golems are firmly
established, the first appearance of glass golems is not recorded
with certainty in any known record. It is believed that they were
created by a spell caster who fancied himself an artist (hence their
eerie beauty), but the identity of that sorry individual cannot be
guessed. Some say that he was the lord of a small domain (one of
the so-called Islands of Terror) who died at the hands of a brave
band of adventurers.

Mechanical Golem

A nightmare of technology, the mechanical golem is an intri-
cate device that depends on both magic and machinery to oper-
ate. It is the only known manner of golem that can be built by any
class of character, even those without spell casting ability, if they
meet the requirements listed below. Construction of the body re-
quires a full year of work (with no more than 2 interruptions,
each no longer than 30 days, being permitted in that time) and an
outlay of 125,000 gold pieces. Almost half of that money (60,000
gold pieces) is spent on the creation of a properly equipped labo-
ratory, and additional golems may be built for only 65,000 gold
pieces using this existing equipment. The person building the
body must have an Intelligence score of not less than 16 and either
experience with fine workmanship (training as a watchmaker) or
a Dexterity score of not less than 17. In the animation of the go-
lem, the following spells are required: animate object, fabricate,
grease, chain lightning, and either major creation or wish.

 

The first of these horrors was created at the order of Easan the
Mad, Lord of Vechor. A twisted man who has always been fasci-
nated by technological devices, Easan is said to have foreseen the
elements of this creature in a study of a falling star. While most
doubt that this is anything but more proof of Easan’s dementia,
few can challenge the obvious conclusion that these evil creatures
are a mix of magic and technology that must surely have come
from the mind of a lunatic.

Zombie Golem

One of Azalin’s two original Ravenloft zombies, these dark
creatures can be created only by wizards of at least 16th level.
They are fashioned from the body parts of animated corpses
(zombies, animal zombies, Strahd zombies, etc.) that have fallen
in combat. In many ways, they are similar to bone golems. As
with bone golems, only 10% of any individual zombie's body will
be suitable for reanimation, so the zombie golem will often be
composed of parts from many types of zombie, making the con-
struction look awkward and alien.

Sewing together the parts of the body requires a full month and
an outlay of 50,000 gold pieces (all of which is used for items that
are consumed in the animation process). The spells needed are
wish, polymorph any object, strength, control undead, and
stinking cloud.

Manuals of Ravenloft Golems

According to rumor, there are magical tomes that detail the
procedures used in the creation of Ravenloft golems. Like the tra-
ditional Manuals of Golems found in other realms, each of these
books describes how to fashion and animate one type of golem.
In addition, the Dark Powers of Ravenloft favor the creation of
these golems over their more mundane cousins, so that any Man-
ual of Golems brought into Ravenloft has a 75% chance of trans-
forming into a Manual of Ravenloft Golems when the tome enters
Ravenloft. Such books do not revert to normal when removed
from Ravenloft, but the creation of the golems they describe is
not possible outside of that domain, making these tomes all but
worthless in other lands. When a Manual of Golems is found in
Ravenloft, roll percentile dice on the following table to determine
the type of golem it can create:

Die Roll Type of Golem Creator Construction GP Cost
Time
01-20 Bone Wizard 2 months 35,000
21-27. 3=Clay Priest 1 month 65,000
28-37 Doll Priest 2 months 20,000
38-45 Flesh Wizard 2 months 50,000
46-55 Gargoyle Priest 4months 100,000
56-63 Glass Priest/ 6 months 125,000
Wizard

64-66 Iron Wizard 4 months 100,000
67-76 Mechanical Any 18 months 125,000
77-80 Stone Wizard 3 months 80,000
81-00 Zombie Priest 2 months 60,000

These works function as normal Manuals of Golems in all
ways, except that the Manual of Mechanical Golems can be used
by a character of any class so long as he meets the requirements
listed in the “Mechanical Golem" text above.

 

 
Golem, Ravenloft

 

 

 

 

 

=
|

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Bone Doll
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any Any
FREQUENCY: Very rare Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any
DIET: Nil Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Non-(0) Non-(0)
TREASURE: Nil Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1 1
ARMOR CLASS: 0 4
MOVEMENT: 12 15
HIT DICE: 14 (70 hp) 10 (40 hp)
THACO: 7 11
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 3d8 3d6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil Nil
SIZE: M (6' tall) T (1’ tall)
MORALE: Fearless (20) Fearless (20)
XP VALUE: 18,000 7,000

Bone Golem

As already mentioned, the bone golem is built from the previous-
ly animated bones of skeletal undead. These horrors stand rough-
ly six feet tall and weight between 50 and 60 pounds. They are
seldom armored and can easily be mistaken for undead, much to
the dismay of those who make this error.

Combat: Bone golems are no more intelligent than other forms of
golem, so they will not employ clever tactics or strategies in com-
bat. Their great power, however, makes them far deadlier than
they initially appear to be. There is a 95% chance that those not
familiar with the true nature of their opponent will mistake them
for simple undead.

Bone golems attack with their surprisingly strong blows and
sharp, claw-like fingers. Each successful hit inflicts 3-24 (3d8)
points of damage. They can never be made to use weapons of any
sort in melee.

In addition to the common characteristics of all Ravenloft go-
lems (described previously), bone golems take only half damage
from those edged or piercing weapons that can harm them.

Bone golems are immune to almost all spells, but can be laid
low with the aid of a shatter spell that is focused on them and has
the capacity to affect objects of their weight. If such a spell is cast
at a bone golem, the golem is entitled to a saving throw vs. spells
to negate it. Failure indicates that weapons able to harm the go-
lem will now inflict twice the damage they normally would.
Thus, edged weapons would do full damage while blunt ones
would inflict double damage.

Once every three rounds, the bone golem may throw back its
head and issue a hideous laugh that causes all those who hear it to
make fear and horror checks. Those who fail either check are par-
alyzed and cannot move for 2-12 rounds. Those who fail both
checks are instantly stricken dead with fear.

 

 

Doll Golem

The doll golem is an animated version of a child's toy that can
be put to either good uses (defending the young) or evil uses (at-
tacking them). It is often crafted so as to make it appear bright
and cheerful when at rest. Upon activation, however, its features
become twisted and horrific.

Combat: The doll golem is, like all similar creatures, immune to
almost all magical attacks. It can be harmed by fire-based spells,
although these do only half damage, while a warp wood spell will
affect the creature as if it were a slow spell. A mending spell re-
stores the creature to full hit points at once.

Each round, the doll golem leaps onto a victim and attempts to
bite it. Success inflicts 3d6 points of damage and forces the victim
to save versus spells. Failure to save causes the victim to begin to
laugh uncontrollably (as if under the influence of a Tasha's uncon-
trollable hideous laughter spell) and become unable to perform
any other action. The effects of the creature's bite are far worse,
however. The victim begins to laugh on the round after the failed
save. At this time, they take 1d4 points of damage from the mus-
cle spasms imposed by the laughter. On following rounds, this in-
creases to 2d4, then 3d4, and so on. The laughter stops when the
character dies or receives a dispel magic. Following recovery, the
victim suffers a penalty on all attack and saving throws of -1 per
round that they were overcome with laughter (e.g., four rounds
of uncontrolled laughter would equal a -4 penalty on attack/
saving throws). This represents the weakness caused by the char-
acter’s inability to breathe and is reduced by 1 point per
subsequent turn until the character is fully recovered.

 

 

 
Golem, Ravenloft

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Gargoyle Glass
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any Any
FREQUENCY: Very rare Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any
DIET: Nil Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Non-(0) Non-(0)
TREASURE: Nil Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1 1
ARMOR CLASS: 0 4
MOVEMENT: 9 12
HIT DICE: 15 (60 hp) 9 (40 hp)
THACO: 5 11
NO. OF ATTACKS: 2 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 3d6/3d6 2d12
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil Nil
SIZE: M (6! tall) M (6' tall)
MORALE: Fearless (20) Fearless (20)
XP VALUE: 16,000 6,000
Gargoyle Golems

The gargoyle golem is a stone construct designed to guard a given
structure. It is roughly the same size and weight as a real gargoyle
(6' tall and 550 pounds). Although they have wings, they cannot
fly. However, a gargoyle golem can leap great distances (up to 100
feet) and will often use this ability to drop down on enemies near-
ing any building the golem is protecting.

Gargoyle golems cannot speak or communicate in any way.
When they move, the sound of grinding rock can be heard by
anyone near them. In fact, it is often this noise that serves as a
party’s first warning that something is amiss in an area.

Combat: When a gargoyle golem attacks in melee combat, it does
so with its two clawed fists. Each fist must attack the same target
and will inflict 3d6 points of damage. Anyone hit by both attacks
must save versus petrification or be turned to stone. On the round
after a gargoyle golem has petrified a victim, it will attack that
same target again. Any hit scored by the golem against such a foe
indicates that the stone body has shattered and cannot be resur-
rected. Reincarnation, on the other hand, is still a viable option.

Gargoyle golems are, like most golems, immune to almost
every form of magical attack directed at them. They are, how-
ever, vulnerable to the effects of an earthquake spell. If such a
spell is targeted directly at a gargoyle golem, it instantly shatters
the creature without affecting the surrounding area. The lesser
transmute rock to mud spell will inflict 2d10 points of damage to
the creature while the reverse (transmute mud to rock) will heal a
like amount of damage.

On the first round of any combat in which the gargoyle golem
has not been identified for what it is, it has a good chance of gain-
ing surprise (-2 on opponent surprise checks). Whenever a gar-
goyle golem attacks a character taken by surprise, it will leap
onto that individual. The crushing weight of the creature delivers
4d10 points of damage and requires every object carried by that
character in a vulnerable position (DM's decision) to save vs.
crushing blows or be destroyed. In the round that a gargoyle go-
lem pounces on a character, it cannot attack with its fists.

 

 

Glass Golems

The glass golem is very nearly a work of art. Built in the form
of a stained glass knight, the creature is often built into a window
fashioned from such glass. Thus, it usually acts as the guardian of
a given location—often a church or shrine.

Glass golems, like most others, never speak or communicate in
any way. When they move, however, they are said to produce a
tinkling sound like that made by delicate crystal wind chimes. If
moving through a lighted area, they strobe and flicker as the light
striking them is broken into its component hues.

Combat: When the stained glass golem attacks, it often has the
advantage of surprise. If its victims have no reason to suspect that
it lurks in a given window, they suffer a -3 on their surprise roll
when the creature makes its presence known.

Once combat is joined, the stained glass figure (which always
has the shape of a knight) strikes with is sword. Each blow that
lands delivers 2d12 points of damage.

Once every three rounds, the golem can unleash a prismatic
spray spell from its body that fans out in all directions. Any ob-
ject or being (friend or foe) within 25 feet of the golem must roll as
if they had been struck by a wizard’s prismatic spray spell (see the
AD&D® Player's Handbook).

Glass golems are the most fragile of any type of Ravenloft go-
lem. Any blunt weapon capable of striking them (that is, a magi-
cal weapon of +2 or better) inflicts double damage. Further, a
shatter spell directed at them weakens them so that all subsequent
melee attacks have a percentage chance equal to twice the number
of points of damage inflicted of instantly slaying the creature.

Anyone casting a mending spell on one of these creatures in-
stantly restores it to full hit points. In addition, they regenerate 1
hit point per round when in an area of direct sunlight (or its
equivalent).

 

 

 
Golem, Ravenloft

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Mechanical Zombie
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any Any
FREQUENCY: Very rare Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any
DIET: Nil Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Non-(0) Non-(0)
TREASURE: Nil Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Neutral
NO. APPEARING; 1 1
ARMOR CLASS: -2 2
MOVEMENT: 12 6
HIT DICE: 13 (75 hp) 18 (60 hp)
THACO: 7 4
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 4d10 3d6/3d6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil Nil
SIZE: M (7' tall) M (6! tall)
MORALE: Fearless (20) Fearless (20)
XP VALUE: 15,000 17,000

Mechanical Golem

The mechanical golem is a nightmare combination of magic and
technology first woven together in the mind of a madman. They
come in many sizes, but are generally man-like in shape. In most
cases, they have some manner of melee weapon built onto one of
their arms.

A mechanical golem moves with a variety of whirs, clicks, and
other mechanical sounds. It occasionally releases a hissing sound
and a cloud of steam. Despite the creature's jury-rigged appear-
ance, however, it is a smoothly functioning and deadly machine.

Combat: In melee combat, the mechanical golem attacks with
whatever weapon has been built into it. In most cases, this
weapon inflicts 4d10 points of damage, although examples of
these creatures capable of inflicting greater or lesser injuries have
been found.

When the golem’s weapon strikes an enemy with a natural at-
tack roll of 20, it delivers a powerful electrical shock. This attack
inflicts an additional 6d6 points of damage (half that if a save ver-
sus spells is made). The victim of this attack is entitled to a saving
throw versus paralysis to avoid being incapacitated for 2d4
rounds due to the effects of the electrical current on his muscles.

Anyone attacking the mechanical golem with a metal weapon
(whether or not it is capable of harming the golem) suffers the
same electrical attack if they roll a natural 20 on their attack dice.
The same saving throw vs. paralysis is required to avoid incapac-
itation as well.

On every other combat round, the golem can engage its light-
ning aura. This field causes all those within 20 feet of the creature
to be hit with small lightning bolts that inflict 3d6 points of dam-
age. Saving throws vs. breath weapons are allowed for half dam-
age and no paralysis is inflicted by this attack. Exposed items
carried by anyone struck by the lightning aura must save vs.
lightning or be destroyed.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Zombie Golem

First created by Azalin from information he gleaned while in the
employ of Strahd von Zarovich of Barovia, these foul creatures
look much like flesh golems. Unlike those traditional golems,
however, these creatures are composed of rotting body parts and
carry the stench of death about them wherever they go.

Unlike flesh golems which are able to emit a guttural roar when
they engage in combat, zombie golems are utterly silent. They
move slowly and without thought, attacking in a lackluster man-
ner that has been retained from their undead status.

Combat: The zombie golem attacks with its powerful fists. In any
round two separate attacks may be made that will inflict 3d6
points of damage each. Because of the creature's slow move-
ments, however, it always acts last in any given combat round
with no initiative check being required. Further, the zombie go-
lem never attains surprise.

The odor of decay and corruption that surrounds a zombie go-
lem is so strong that it causes all those who move within 30 feet of
it to save vs. poison or be overcome with nausea. Such individ-
uals suffer a -2 penalty on all attack rolls and saving throws while
within the area of the stench. Characters who make their saving
throws are unaffected unless they move outside of the area and
then re-enter it (in which case they must make another save).

Zombie golems are immune to most magical spells, although a
resurrection spell will instantly slay them. On the other hand, an
animate dead spell will restore them to full hit points as if it were
some manner of healing magic.

 
Grim Reaper

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any Ravenloft
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Special
INTELLIGENCE: High (13-14)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 0
MOVEMENT: FI 9 (A)
HIT DICE: a

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: See below
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below
SIZE: M (7’ tall)
MORALE: Fearless (20)
XP VALUE: 4,000

The grim reaper (or death spirit) is a creature from the negative
material plane that appears only in Ravenloft. It is drawn to the
ebbing life energies of a creature on the verge of death (i.e., at or
below 0 hit points) and seems, in some way, to feed upon those
essences. Despite its apparent nature, a death spirit is not undead.

A grim reaper has the appearance of a bleached skeleton
shrouded in a dark robe. It is always carrying a scythe in its
boney hands and stands well over six feet in height.

No death spirit has ever been know to speak to the living on
their own terms, but rumors persist that such a creature can be
contacted by the use of speak to dead spell. In such cases,
language does not seem to be a factor.

Combat: A death spirit has little need to enter combat in most
cases. Typically, it will be drawn into battle only when an
attempt is made to prevent it from feeding on the spirit of a dying
person. In such cases, its wrath is great and its power terrible.

When the spirit arrives to feed, it is invisible and can thus be
attacked effectively only by those able to see invisible objects. In
addition, it is hit only by +3 or better magical weapons and is
immune to all mind and life affecting spells (including sleep,
charm, suggestion, fear, finger of death, cause light wounds, etc).

As already mentioned, the death spirit is not truly undead; it is,
therefore, immune to any attempts to turn it as well as the effects
of spells like control or detect undead. Similarly, it is immune to
all manner of cold-, fire-, or electricity-based spells. A negative
plane protection spell cast upon the intended victim of the death
spirit will prevent the feeding and inflict damage to the reaper
normally.

When the death spirit attacks a creature other than the one it
has come to feed upon, it does so in three ways. On the first round
of any combat, it will strike with its scythe (if possible). This
ethereal weapon hits as if it were a normal polearm, but inflicts
only 1d4 points of physical damage. Anyone hit by this blade
must, however, save vs. death magic or be instantly slain. In the
second round, it will fix its gaze on one of its attackers, forcing
him to make a horror check or be overwhelmed by the creature's
aura of death. On the third round, it strikes again with its scythe,
this time using the shaft as if it were a quarterstaff. Anyone hit by

 

 

 

this attack suffers 1d4 points of damage and affected as if by a
feign death spell. The effects of this spell will fade if the creature is
driven off. On the next round, this cycle begins again with the
normal scythe attack.

If, at any time during the combat, the creature is able to strike
at its intended victim, it does so with its scythe. No attack roll is
required and no physical damage is done; rather, the life essence
of the victim is drained away. As soon as this is done, the spirit
fades away into the Mists of Ravenloft. Any attempt at
resurrection or reincarnation of the victim is doomed to fail
unless the powers attempting it are divine in nature.

If the reaper is reduced to 0 hit points, it is driven off. The
intended victim benefits from this, and instantly regains 10% of
his original hit point score. Similarly, if healing magic is used on
the dying person at any point during the encounter, he is rescued
from the brink of death and the reaper is driven off.

Habitat/Society: There are those who say that death spirits are
agents of the Dark Powers of Ravenloft and that thwarting them
earns the wrath of these mighty forces. No evidence exists to
support that claim, but some connection between the two seems
almost a certainty.

The chance that any mortally wounded individual (one
reduced to 0 or fewer hit points) will attract the attention of a
death spirit is equal to 5% per character experience level. Thus, a
15th level character on his death bed has a 75% chance of being
visited by a grim reaper.

Ecology: Being creatures of the negative material plane, these
nightmares seem to have no place in the physical world. There are
those who contend, however, that they play a vital link in the
balance between life and death that is central to all
neutral-aligned philosophies.

 

 

 

 
Imp, Assassin

    

  

  

  
 

 

SR pi nO fE ‘

iter:

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any Ravenloft
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any (night)
DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)
TREASURE: O
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 0
MOVEMENT: 6, FL 18 (B)
HIT DICE: 3

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 50%

SIZE: T (1' tall)
MORALE: Average (8-10)
XP VALUE: 975

The assassin imp is a clever and evil creature that, like the more
common quasit or traditional imp, serves the cause of darkness.

Assassin imps are tiny creatures, seldom standing over one foot
in height. They are generally deep black in color, but some indi-
viduals are as light as slate gray. Two bat-like wings fan out from
the creature's back and enable it to fly, while a long, slender tail
dangles behind it. The tail, which is almost constantly in motion,
ends in a scorpion-like stinger (see below). The creature is noted
for its keen eyesight and 60’ infravision.

Assassin imps are able to communicate with others of their
kind by means of a language that some describe as purely evil in
sound and expression.

Combat: As its name implies, the assassin imp often strikes with-
out warning. The spell-like abilities of the imp are obviously use-
ful in such practices. At will, an assassin imp can become
invisible, detect magic, or find traps. Three times per day the imp
can employ a knock or cause light wounds spell, and once per day
it may cast a command spell.

When an assassin imp attacks a target that has not yet detected
it, it imposes a —3 to that creature's surprise roll. Often, the imp
avoids detection by remaining invisible until its victim draws
near and then diving at them from above.

Assassin imps generally try to kill their victims in some way
that is linked to their professions. Thus, a weaponsmith might be
impaled on one of his own swords or a thief slain by a poisoned
needle cleverly concealed in his own home.

An assassin imp’s stinger is not nearly as dangerous as that of a
true imp. While it inflicts the same 1d4 points of damage with
each successful attack, the poison it injects does not cause death.
Rather, it forces those who fail to save against its effects into a
deep state of hibernation (as a feign death spell) that lasts for 2d4
days. Assassin imps often linger near the body of an affected indi-
vidual in hopes of seeing them buried alive by their companions.
When this happens, the imp always arranges for the character's
friends to discover what they have done after it is too late.

Assassin imps are immune to all fire, cold, or electricity-based
attacks. They have a basic 50% immunity to all other spells and
save as if they were 7 HD monsters. They can be hit only by magi-
cal weapons of +2 or better and are immune to all poisons and
ae They regenerate lost hit points at the rate of 1 per melee
round,

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Whenever a wizard of lawful evil alignment em-
ploysa find familiar spell in Ravenloft, there is a base 10% chance
per level that he or she will receive an imp as a servant. If that in-
dividual has already failed at least one Ravenloft Powers check,
then the imp is an assassin imp.

The imp will serve its master faithfully, but cannot leave
Ravenloft. If its lord leaves Ravenloft and it must remain behind,
it is instantly slain (with the normal penalties for losing a familiar
being invoked.) As with a normal imp, however, the assassin will
attempt to lead its master into greater and greater acts of dark-
ness. Its final goal in all this is to cause the wizard it serves to fall
to the dark powers and (with luck) become the lord of a domain
in Ravenloft.

The master of an assassin imp is telepathically linked to it
whenever the two are within one mile of each other. This enables
the wizard to receive all of the sensory input from its familiar (in-
cluding infravision). The master also acquires the imp’s natural
magic resistance (50%) and can cast spells as if he were 1 level
higher than he actually is when within one mile of the creature.
When the assassin imp moves beyond this range, the wizard re-
verts to his normal level. The death of an assassin imp causes its
master to instantly lose 4 levels of experience (in addition to all
other penalties for losing a familiar.)

The assassin imp will ruthlessly kill those that it feels are a
threat to its master—whether or not its master desires it to do so.
Thus, the creature will often act on its own in “defending” its lord
and may actually draw unwanted attention to its master. Thus, a
wizard may well find that everyone who has dangerous informa-
tion about him (including his loved ones) have become targets for
the murderous attentions of his familiar.

Ecology: The assassin imp is a tool of the Dark Powers of
Ravenloft that seeks to lead the already evil into acts that will
eventually trap him in the Demiplane of Dread forever.

     
  

 
Impersonator

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any wetlands or subterranean
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Blood
INTELLIGENCE: Semi- (2-4)
TREASURE: Varies
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 8
MOVEMENT: 3

HIT DICE: 5+2

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: S (4' diameter)
MORALE: Average (8-10)
XP VALUE: 13,000

The impersonator is strange form of life that lurks in swamps,
wetlands, and caverns, waiting for its chance to drain the blood
from a living creature.

In its natural form, an impersonator appears to be nothing
more than a pool of thick, stagnant water. In actuality, it is far
more dense than water and its body has the consistency of thick
oil. When the creature decides to attack, however, it assumes the
form of one of its past victims.

In their natural forms, there is no evidence that these creatures can
communicate with each other or with outsiders in anyway. When
they assume the form of another being, however, they can employ
any means of communication utilized by their former victims.

Combat: An impersonator usually uses its power of replication to
assume a form that will make it welcome among others. It then
lures one or more individuals into a situation where they feel safe
and are either helpless or asleep. It then returns to its true form
and attacks them. While the impersonator can engage in battle
while in its assumed form, it is loathe to do so. For one thing,
damage inflicted on its victims in this state means less blood to be
consumed later, In addition, the assumed form has only the statis-
tics of the impersonator. Thus, while it may appear to be a power-
ful knight in field plate, it is actually only a 5 HD monster with
AC 8. Any attack from the impersonator in its assumed form in-
flicts 1d4 points of damage. The impersonator does not gain any
of its form's special abilities (like infravision or magical spells), al-
though it does have access to all of the knowledge that its new
form possessed.

The impersonator feeds by drawing blood out of its victims.
However, the process it uses to do this is quite slow and, there-
fore, the creature must first immobilize its prey. This is accom-
plished by physical contact with its natural form. Anyone who
touches the impersonator while it is in its true form must save vs.
poison (with a +4 bonus to their roll) or become unable to move.
The effect of this toxin wears off 1d4 rounds after contact with the
creature is terminated.

While its victim is helpless, however, the impersonator flows
over them, and begins to siphon off their blood. Each round, the
victim will suffer 1d4 points of damage. Although the blood drain
itself is painless, the victim eventually begins to feel a bone-
numbing cold as they draw nearer and nearer to death.

 

 

 

 

Impersonators seldom have the chance to attack in their natu-
ral forms, so they use their special ability of replication to lure
victims near. This power allows an impersonator to assume the
form of any creature whose blood it has tasted. It takes one round
to assume the new form; but once this is done, it can remain in
that state for 1 turn (10 minutes) per point of damage it inflicted
on that particular victim. Thus, if it had drained 50 hit points
from a 9th level fighter it could assume the form of that fighter for
50 turns (8.3 hours) before it reverts to its natural form. The im-
personator can abandon its disguise at any time by spending 1
round to melt back into its true state. Once an impersonator has
assumed a specific form, it cannot do so again until it feeds on
that victim again. However, the typical impersonator will have
from 3-12 (3d4) forms available to it at any given time, and the
order in which it fed upon victims has no bearing on the order in
which it assumes their forms.

Habitat/Society: The impersonator has an unusually evil and
cunning nature. While it is not truly sentient, it has a natural abil-
ity to sense what forms a group of near-by individuals might find
pleasing from those available to it. Thus, it never appears before
a band of elves in the form of a growling orc.

Once the impersonator has located a rich feeding ground (say,
near a small village) it will attempt to attack and kill an unsus-
pecting member of that community. Then, using the form it has
just acquired, it will move into that group and begin to seek new
prey. By constantly assuming new forms as it feeds, it is often able
to stay one step ahead of those who would kill it, leaving a trail of
pale, bloodless bodies behind.

Ecology: The origins of the impersonator are unknown. If it is a
natural creature, which most sages doubt, then it is possibly a rel-
ative of the mimic. The majority of scholars, however, believe
that the impersonator is either a creature from the lower planes or
the result of twisted magical experiments.

 

 
Lycanthrope, Werebat

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate woodlands
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Flock
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Blood
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: B
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil
NO, APPEARING: 1-4

ARMOR CLASS: 5
MOVEMENT: 9, Fl 15 (D)
HIT DICE: 4+2

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4/1d4
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (6' tall)
MORALE: Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 420

Like the other species of lycanthrope found in Ravenloft, two va-
rieties of werebat exist—natural (or true) and infected. True were-
bats are those creatures who have been born to werebat parents.
The parents may be either true or infected werebats themselves,
but the offspring of any two werebats is a true werebat. In those
rare cases when a child is born with one werebat and one human
parent, there is a 50% chance that it will be a true werebat and a
25% chance that it will be an infected werebat.

True werebats have three forms: normal human, vampire bat,
or hybrid. In the first form, it is marked by bat-like features and
traits (an aversion to bright lights, keen night vision, a taste for
blood or raw meat, etc.). In its vampire bat form, it looks just like
a common vampire bat. By far the most feared of its forms, how-
ever, is that of the hybrid. In this form, it retains its humanoid
shape but takes on the added features of a bat. The arms extend to
become willowy and leather wings form under them, the teeth
sharpen into deadly fangs, and the snout protrudes from the face.
The nails stretch into deadly claws and the eyes spawn an inner
glow when light hits them.

Infected werebats have only two of the three forms listed
above. Most (75%) have a human and hybrid form, while the rest
have only a human and true bat form.

Combat: The type of attacks employed by a werebat depend
upon its form. In human form, it will depend upon weapons to in-
flict damage, for its bare hands inflict but 1d2 points per attack. If
at all possible, the creature will avoid combat in this form.

In bat form, they attack just as if they were bats. Each round,
they may attack once and inflict but a single point of damage with
any successful strike. The bitten victim, of course, stands a
chance of contracting lycanthropy (see below), even from this
meager wound. Opponents of a werebat in this form will find that
it is unusually resilient, for it has its full human-form hit points.

In hybrid form, the werebat does not have the manual dexteri-
ty to employ weapons effectively. However, its deadly sharp
claws and needle-like teeth make it far from helpless. In each
round it may strike twice with its claws (inflicting 1d4 points of
damage each). If both of these attacks hits, it may follow with a
vicious bite that does 2d4 points of damage. Werebats can fly in
their hybrid form and often use this ability to their advantage in
combat.

Anyone who takes damage from a werebat's natural attacks

 

 

 

 

 

iment
Ning
eT

 

 

stands a chance of contracting the disease of lycanthropy and be-
coming an infected werebat. Every point of damage done indi-
cates a flat 2% chance per point that the victim will become
infected. The procedures for curing an infected lycanthrope are
given in Chapter 5 of the RAVENLOFI™ Boxed Set.

Werebats can be harmed only by silver or +1 or better magical
weapons. Any wound inflicted by another type of weapon knits
as quickly as it is inflicted, hinting at the creature's true nature.

Habitat/Society: Werebats favor caves in lightly wooded, temper-
ate regions as their homes. From here, they can fly out and seek
prey from which they can draw the blood necessary to satisfy
their thirst.

Werebat caves are commonly home to only one family of were-
bats (two parents and 1-4 young). The young remain in true bat
form until they reach 3 years of age. A this time, they mature into
adults and, within a single year, become fully grown. This time of
transformation brings out a great hunger in the creature, which
forces it to spend most of its time hunting and feeding. Human
villages near a werebat cave will certainly lose many citizens to
the feasting of the ravenous creature at this time.

In addition to the werebat family, each cave will contain 20-200
(20d10) common bats and 1-10 giant bats. All of these lesser are
under the command of the adult werebats and will act as their
sentinels and companions.

Ecology: Although werebats favor humans and demihumans as
prey, they have been known to feed on the blood of other mam-
mals (like cattle and horses) when preferred prey is not available.
Interestingly, such animals seem to be immune to the lycanthropy
that these dark creatures spread.

While werebats do look upon humans and demihumans as ani-
mals to be devoured, they are not cruel or evil in their attacks.
They simply regard such beings as having a lower place in the
food chain. Werebats will, typically, refer to themselves as “pred-
ators of the night.”

 
lawe ar aye
Net € a € ay en

Lycanthrope, V

  

 

EE aVvOO7OOoOe

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate Woodlands
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Flock
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Genius (17-18)
TREASURE: Qx10
ALIGNMENT: Neutral good
NO. APPEARING: 2-8 (2d4)
ARMOR CLASS: 6
MOVEMENT: 1, Fl 27 (C)
HIT DICE: 4+2
THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: i!
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-12 (2d6)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: M (5' tall)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 420

Wereravens are a race of wise and good-aligned shapechangers
who seem to have migrated to Ravenloft from another realm
(probably Greyhawk) centuries ago. While they are no longer
found on their plane of origin, they have managed to survive in
Ravenloft.

Natural wereravens have three forms, that of anormal human,
a huge raven, and a hybrid of the two. Infected wereravens can
assume only two of the above forms. While all infected
wereravens can take the human form, roughly half are able to
turn into hybrids while the others can transform into huge rav-
ens.

The hybrid form of these creatures looks much like that of a
werebat. The arms grow long and thin, sprouting feathers and
transforming into wings. The mouth hardens and projects into a
straight, pecking beak, and the eyes turn jet black. A coat of
feathers replaces the normal body hair of the human form.

Combat: Wereravens are deadly opponents in close combat, al-
though they seldom engage in it. Because they can be hit only by
silver weapons or those with a +2 or better magical bonus, these
creatures do not fear most armed parties.

When in human form, a wereraven retains its natural immuni-
ties to certain weapons, but has no real attack of its own. If
forced to fight unarmed, it inflicts a mere 1-2 points of damage.
For this reason, wereravens in human form often employ weap-
ons, doing damage appropriate to the arms they wield.

In raven form, the wereraven attacks as if it were a common
example of that creature. Thus, it inflicts but 1-2 points of dam-
age but has a 1 in 10 chance of scoring an eye peck with each
successful attack. Any eye peck will cause the target to lose the
use of one eye until a heal or regeneration spell can be cast on the
victim. Half-blinded persons (those who have lost 1 eye) suffer a
—2 on all attack rolls. A second eye peck results in total blind-
ness until the above cure can be affected.

In hybrid form, the wereraven’s arms have grown into wings,
making them almost useless in combat. However, the muscles in
their mouths/beaks strengthen, giving them a savage bite. Each at-
tack made with the creature's beak inflicts 2d6 points of damage.

Anyone bitten or pecked by the wereraven has a 2% chance
per point of damage inflicted of becoming an infected wereraven.
Infected lycanthropes are discussed in the RAVENLOFI™ Boxed
Set.

 

 

 

Wereravens are strong flyers and often use this ability to their
advantage in combat.

Habitat/Society: A wereraven family will be found only at the
heart of a dense forest. Here, they live in the hollowed out body
of a great tree. Entrance to their lair is possible only from above
(if one does not wish to cut or break through the trunk itself), Cu-
riously, the wereravens are able to keep the tree in which they nest
from dying even after they have hollowed it out, so it is difficult
to distinguish from the normal trees around it.

Wereravens recognize that they are bastions of good in a land
dominated by evil. They have managed to survive by avoiding
large populations or overt acts of good that would draw the at-
tention of the reigning lords to them. Thus, a wereraven flock will
generally have no more than 2-8 adults in it. Of course, such
groups have young with them (1-4 per 2 adults), but these are sel-
dom encountered for they remain in a true raven state until they
are old enough to fend for themselves. In addition, a typical
wereraven lair will draw 10-100 (10d10) common ravens to nest
in the trees about it. These wise birds will serve the wereravens,
doing their bidding and striving to protect them from harm.

Wereravens are not opposed to helping out the cause of good in
Ravenloft, but they do so reluctantly. This is not because they do
not wish to do good, but because they fear the wrath of the Dark
Powers. It is said that the wereravens have come to the aid of en-
dangered Vistani clans on several occasions and that close ties ex-
ist between these two races, but neither will admit this openly.

Ecology: Wereravens are omnivores who prefer to maintain a
vegetarian diet. They enjoy berries and nuts, but will eat carrion
or kill for fresh meat from time to time in order to maintain good

health.

 

 
Men (Abber Nomads)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: The Nightmare Lands
FREQUENCY: Common
ORGANIZATION: Tribe
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 10-40 (10d4)
ARMOR CLASS: 8 (10)
MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 2

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-2 or by weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Resist illusions
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: M (62/2! tall)
MORALE: Average (8-10)
XP VALUE: 65

The Abber nomads are a stoic and proud people who dwell in the
dreaded Nightmare Lands. Considered by outsiders to be barbar-
ians, the Abber nomads have an unusually sophisticated outlook
on life that, not surprisingly, is almost as alien as the bizarre realm
that they inhabit.

The typical Abber nomad male stands roughly six and a half
feet tall with females being only an inch or so shorter. They are
generally well-muscled survivors, as befits their nomadic society
and the harsh land with which they must contend.

The language of the Abber nomads is absolutely unique; no
scholar has ever been able to liken it to any tongue spoken by any
other race in any known land. Further, there seems to be little in
their culture to link these people with any other human race,
making them seem all the more outcast and alien to the visitor.

Combat: When hunting or making ready for battle, Abber no-
mads paint their faces and bodies with traditional symbols that
they feel will give them power over the animals they are stalking
or the enemies they are confronting. Most wear tanned skins and
carry wooden shields that provide them with AC 8 protection. In
all regards, save the following, they fight as normal men.

In melee combat, they employ long, slender spears set with
stone tips that function as javelins. These weapons could be
thrown, but the nomads seldom use them in that manner and
make no effort to balance them for flight.

In missile combat, the Abber nomads use short bows. They of-
ten coat their arrowheads in a mild toxin (Class C, 2-5 minutes,
25/2d4) to aid in hunting larger animals. Asa rule, 1 in 3 nomads
will have poisoned arrows in any encounter.

The Abber nomads live in a wild land of chaos and uncertainty.
Because of this, they have developed a natural immunity to all
manner of illusions and hallucinations. Any spell designed to fool
any of an Abber nomad's senses has a 25% chance of failing to af-
fect them. Even if the spell manages to get past their inherent re-
sistance to it, they are entitled to a +4 bonus on any saving
throws required to negate enchantments of this type.

Habitat/Society: The Abber nomads, as their name implies, make
no permanent structures. They travel about from place to place in
search of the basic elements of survival. They work no metals,
but are skilled at woodworking and have some interest in stone
carving (usually for the design and construction of minor tools

 

 

 

 

and hunting implements).

While the Abber nomads might seem to be a fairly typical ab-
original culture, nothing could be further than the truth. Their
strange surroundings have convinced them that the universe is a
wild and unpredictable place—leaving them with no understand-
ing of science or the traditional concepts of cause and effect. In
the Nightmare Lands, a device or spell that works one day, might
cease to function the next.

Because of the strange happenings of the Nightmare Lands, the
nomads have developed a philosophy that, greatly paraphrased,
says that anything they cannot perceive themselves does not ex-
ist. Thus, someone who walks out of their sight ceases to exist un-
til they are again visible. While this can make outsiders
uncomfortable and efforts to deal with the nomads very difficult
(the nomads will make no long range plans or commitments), it
enables them to cope with life in a wild place that seems oblivious
to the natural laws that rule the rest of the universe. In addition,
the nomads have no faith in the permanency of anything, includ-
ing ideas or memories. In short, they accept what is and make no
efforts to change it or participate in it. They are, perhaps, the uni-
verse’s most withdrawn and disinterested occupants.

Each tribe of nomads will be composed of 10-40 adults (rough-
ly half male and half female). In addition, there will be another
25% of this number who are young children that do not fight or
hunt. Among adults, men and women hunt and share all labors
equally. One in ten of the adults will be a leader with 5 HD
(THACO 15). There may be more than one leader in any given
tribe. None of the Abber nomads will employ any manner of
spells, for they practice no magic.

Ecology: As the Nightmare Lands have no natural ecosystem,
any judgement about the nomad’s place in it is difficult to make.
Still, it is clear that, even if the wild lands about them were not
constantly in flux, they would have little impact upon them.
They are a simple people who survive as hunters and gatherers.

 
Men (Lost Ones & Madmen)

 

    

Taianlunene>

oth oa ae Cu fila )

Qui

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

= i == 72S ES =, SS eee
Lost Ones Madmen

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any Ravenloft Any urban

FREQUENCY: Very rare Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any (usually
night)

DIET: Omnivore Omnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7) Average (8-10)

TREASURE: Nil Varies

ALIGNMENT: Neutral Chaotic evil

NO. APPEARING: 1 1

ARMOR CLASS: 10 Varies

MOVEMENT: 6 u

HIT DICE: 1-1 2

THACO: 20 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d2 or by weapon 1d3 or by weapon

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Rage Surprise

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil Nil

SIZE: M (6' tall) M (6' tall)

MORALE: Unsteady (5-7) Average (8-10)

XP VALUE: 7 35

Lost Ones

In a land as filled with nightmares and unspeakable horrors as
Ravenloft, there are persons who have seen more evil than they
can possibly bear. These shattered and broken souls are know
throughout the demiplane as “the lost ones.”

Almost mindless, the lost ones have no interest in the outside
world. They wander about, often staying in some place where
they feel safe, and spend most of their time in an almost catatonic
state. The enormity of the things they have seen is written in their
tortured features and the blankness of their eyes which seem to
have lost the very spark of life.

Lost ones seldom speak or communicate in any way. When
they do,it is often nothing more that a muttered warning or peri-
odic cry of alarm and terror.

Combat: Lost ones will take no actions to defend themselves from
attack and will not normally engage others in combat. The only
time they have been known to do so is when they are reminded of
the terrors they have seen. For example, a woman who has seen
her children destroyed by a vampire might go into a berserk fit
and attack someone who looks much like the monster that took
her family (and sanity) from her. In such cases, they attack with
whatever weapons are nearby (usually just their hands). The fe-
rocity and suddenness of their rage, however, imposes a —1 pen-
alty on their opponent's surprise rolls.

Habitat/Society: Lost ones can be found anywhere in Ravenloft.
As a rule, their wanderings will carry them to towns and villages
where they become pitied and shunned creatures who survive
only by the kindness of others. The only known way to return a
lost one to sanity is for them to confront the horrors that de-
stroyed them. If they see the thing that drove them to mental de-
struction slain, there is a 25% chance that they will be able to
begin recovering—a process that may take many months. Be-
cause of the special link these people have with the Dark Powers,
they are immune to magical attempts to cure them.

Ecology: Lost ones have given up all links with reality. As such, they
produce nothing useful and play no important role in the world.

 

Madmen

For some, the horrors of Ravenloft are too much to bear. While
those too weak to cope with the things they have seen are de-
stroyed (see Lost Ones), others are driven into absolute madness.
Twisted to evil, they prowl the night looking for fresh victims—
often their own friends and neighbors—to slaughter.

Combat: Typically, madmen will depend on smaller weapons—
knives, hand axes, garrotes, etc.—that they can conceal until
they strike. Madmen normally present a pleasing front that lures
their would-be victims into a false sense of security before they
strike. When a madman strikes in this fashion, he imposes a -2
penalty on his victim's surprise rolls. In addition, those surprised
by the madman’s attacks take triple damage as if they had been
backstabbed by a 5th level thief. If confronted with actual resist-
ance to their attack, the madman will generally flee.

Habitat/Society: In many cases, madmen appear normal. They
may even lead a normal life and go about in public without no-
tice. Thus, their dress and behavior are dictated by their sur-
roundings. When something sparks the insanity that burns within
them, however, they turn into brutal killers who seek to drive the
horrors from their memories in a torrent of blood.

Some madmen have special “calling cards” that they use to
mark their kills. In this way, they begin a dangerous game of cat-
and-mouse with the local constabulary. A madman’s calling card
might be anything from a particular style of murder (cutting the
throat, a single wound to the heart, etc.) to an unusual item left
behind at the scene of each killing. The subconscious mind of
these twisted murderers often causes them to leave clues to their
identity or that of their next victim in their “calling cards.”

Ecology: In many cases, the madman continues to lead a normal
life, interacting with society just as they did before witnessing the
horrors that drove them over the edge.

 

 
Mist Horror

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Common Wandering
CLI Ravenloft mists Ravenloft mists
FREQUENCY: Common Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Solitary Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any
DIET: Nil Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7) Average (8-10)
TREASURE: Nil Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1 1
ARMOR CLASS: 2 0
MOVEMENT: 15 15
HIT DICE: 5 5
THACO: 15 15
NO. OF ATTACKS: 2 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2d6/2d6 2d6/2d6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 50% 50%
SIZE: Varies Varies
MORALE: Steady (11-12) Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 3,000 5,000

Mist horrors lurk in the swirling banks of fog that encompass all
of Ravenloft. Any creature who lingers too long in the mist is sure
to draw the attentions, and earn the wrath, of these horrid crea-
tures.

While their presence is often sensed as they move by a party
just outside of visual range—an unusual ripple in the vapors to
one side, a strange sensation of some lurking presence—they do
not allow themselves to be seen until they attack. When they do
make their presence known, their form can be greatly varied,
though they always appear to be made of mist. While a horror is
generally man-sized, it can take any shape it desires, usually tak-
ing on a form that it knows (from an empathic probe of the vic-
tim’s mind) will cause terror. Thus, persons afraid of wolves
would find themselves facing a six-foot-long wolf composed of
billowing fog.

Mist horrors appear to be able to communicate telempathically
with anyone moving through the Ravenloft Mists. Thus, when
they are about to attack or are stalking someone, they will send
feelings of dread and fear into their minds. In addition, they often
use this power to entice persons outside of the mists to enter them.
Communication in this manner consists of feelings and impres-
sions rather than solid understanding. Someone being called into
the mists by these foul spirits might begin to feel an mild fascina-
tion with the billowing clouds of vapor. Eventually, this interest
grows into a consuming need to enter the mists.

Combat: It takes a mist horror some time (generally 1d4 turns) to
assemble its physical form and attack someone travelling through
the mists. Thus, those who keep moving are safe from harm as a
mist horror is very restricted in its own movement and must re-
main within a small area. A mist horror will often use its telem-
pathic powers to make travellers feel that they are safe and can
rest without danger. Once they stop moving, of course, it attacks.

When a mist horror attacks it is likely to catch its victims off
guard. This is largely due to the fact that it can spring out of the
swirling vapors (in which it is treated as if it were invisible) with-
out warning. Once a mist horror assumes its combat shape (what-
ever form that may be), it is easy enough to detect, although it
can, at will, break off from combat and return to the mists, effec-
tively becoming invisible again. When a mist horror opts to do
this (or before it assumes a combat form), it is protected from any

 

 

 

attack as its essence disperses through the mists. However, it re-
quires 1d4 turns to reform.

When in combat, the horror will attack in whatever manner
seems appropriate for its form. Because of the mystic nature of
this being, however, the number of attacks it is entitled to and the
damage it inflicts remain constant (two attacks at 2d6 points
each.) Thus, if the horror appears as a vast, six-tentacled creature
only two of its limbs would strike each round.

Because of its almost insubstantial nature, the mist horror can
be hit only by +2 or better magical weapons. Further, it has an in-
nate magic resistance (50%) that not only protects it, but radiates
into an area 20’ around it, canceling the effects of all spells cast in
its presence. Because this magic resistance takes the form of a
mental wave that affects the minds of spell casters and upsets
their ability to properly direct magical influences, it has no effect
on magical items. Thus, a fireball spell directed at a mist horror
has a 50% chance of failure while a wand of fireballs will work
normally. Magical effects already in place (such as infravision) do
not falter when they enter this aura. Spells cast within the aura
must overcome both the magical resistance of the target and the
effects of the spell disruption field.

Mist horrors are, in a sense, a form of undead. They can be
turned as if they were “special” creatures by high-level priests and
paladins. They suffer no damage from spells designed to affect
undead (negative plane protection, for example) and are immune
to the effects of holy water. They cannot be charmed or con-
trolled in any way and have no physical forms to be affected by
spells like cause blindness or cause light wounds.

Habitat/Society: Mist horrors are the spirits of evil beings who,
while not foul enough to receive their own domain, attracted the
attention of the Dark Powers with their diabolical acts during
life. Upon their deaths, their spirits leave their bodies to enter the
mists. Throughout Ravenloft, there is a superstition that anyone
buried on a foggy day will become a mist horror. This may or
may not be true, but the Vistani themselves seem to take this be-

 
Mist Horror

lief very seriously and that lends great credence to it in the eyes of
many.

Once it becomes a mist horror, the evil spirit is unable to move
about freely. Like the various lords scattered throughout
Ravenloft, the mist horror must remain in one area. Asa rule, this
region is very small. Thus, as mentioned earlier, the time required
for the horror to assume a dangerous form makes it possible for
explorers moving through the Ravenloft Mists to avoid attack if
they do not linger too long in any one place.

Because mist horrors know that they were judged to be less im-
portant than the lords of even the smallest domain, they envy
them their comparative freedom and power. This hostility burns
within them, making them more and more evil as time goes by.
Thus, when a mist horror is encountered, it is a foul and spiteful
spirit that seeks only to cause pain and suffering. If a party travel-
ling through the mists is bearing wounded, infirm, or otherwise
defenseless beings with them, these will often be the first target of
a mist horror's attack. By destroying the persons who have en-
trusted their well being to the might of other party members, the
horrors hope to shatter the morale of the entire group.

Ecology: As mentioned above, mist horrors are the spirits of evil
beings who did not merit a place as lord of their own domain. The
Vistani say they serve a vital role in maintaining the structure of
Ravenloft and that the very land itself could not exist without
their lingering presence. Whether this is true or not, no outsider
can say.

Wandering Horrors

The wandering horror is an even more dangerous, though
thankfully rarer, version of the mist horror. Unlike the traditional
mist horror, it is not rooted in a given place and can travel
through the Ravenloft Mists at will in search of victims. When it
attacks, it is every bit as evil and malicious as its kindred spirit.

Wandering horrors appear as dark shapes that can be seen as
they move through the mists. Unlike mist horrors, they are
locked into a single shape—one that is based on the evil deed they
did in life. For example, a cruel baron who ordered those he con-
sidered disloyal beheaded might well appear as a wandering fig-
ure without a head while a woman who murdered her lover with
a poisonous spider might appear as a giant black widow. The
wandering horror looks much like a heat mirage, for its body
seems to ripple and shift from second to second. This effect is a re-
flection of its spiritual nature and the twisted shape of its soul.

Wandering horrors employ the same telempathic communica-
tion used by their lesser cousins, but are also able to use this
power to implant a suggestion (once per day) in the minds of their
victims. In order to be affected by this power, the target must be
within 120 feet of the horror.

Combat: When moving through the mists in an effort to position
itself for an attack, the wandering horror is 75% unlikely to be
detected. Once it attacks, however, it is fully visible to all its op-
ponents. If it wishes to break away from combat, it may do so by
attempting to vanish into the mists again (75% chance of suc-
cess). Thereafter, it returns to its virtually undetectable state.
When a wandering horror attacks a person that has not detected
it, it imposes a ~3 on their surprise check.

In combat, the wandering horror has the same attacks and de-
fenses as the traditional mist horror (two attacks for 2d6 points of
damage each). It can also send out a wave of fear with its telem-

fe,

 

 

 

ina tla fst ste i

VY

  

  

 

 

pathic power. While this can be attempted only once per day, it
causes all those within 120 feet to make a fear check. Since a failed
fear check often has the result of scattering a party that might
otherwise destroy the wanderer, it will always use this power (if
possible) on the first round of combat (or the second if it makes a
surprise attack).

The wandering horror can only be hit by +2 or better magical
weapons and has the same magical resistance as the mist horror.
This magic resistance functions in the exact same way, affecting
spell casters but not magical items, save that it has a greater area
of effect (30 feet.)

A wandering horror can be turned by priests and paladins as if
it were a “special” undead creature. If a character attempts to turn
it and fails, however, they are subject to a special telempathic
backlash that causes them to make a fear check at a —2 penalty.

Wandering horrors suffer no damage from spells designed to
affect undead (negative plane protection, for example) and are
immune to the effects of holy water. They cannot be charmed or
controlled in any way and have no physical forms to be affected
by spells like cause blindness or cause light wounds.

Habitat/Society: The wandering horror is an evolutionary step
above the mist horror. In essence, a mist horror is the evil soul of
a being foul enough to draw the attention of the Dark Powers, but
not so evil as to be rewarded/cursed with their own domain. Af-
ter a period of time as a mist horror, however, this spirit may have
caused enough fear and suffering (in short, done enough evil) to
be elevated to the status of wandering horror.

Wandering horrors share the same vile and sadistic mannerisms
as their lesser brethren. If anything, in fact, they are far more evil
and dangerous as they generally hope to prove themselves dark
and foul enough to earn their own domain and escape the limbo
in which they now dwell.

Ecology: Wandering horrors seem to be as much a part of the fab-
ric of Ravenloft as mist horrors. There are those who say that the
destruction of a wandering horror weakens all of the evil things in
Ravenloft slightly. Of course, as evil things are constantly dying
and becoming mist horrors, this less-than-insignificant drop in
power is quickly replenished.

Pseudo-horrors

In addition to the true mist horrors that lurk in the boiling va-
pors that surround Ravenloft, there are the pseudo-horrors.
These are simply beings travelling through the mists for one rea-
son or another. In most cases, they have wandered in through a
portal from some other land and are seeking escape. Because
these temporary, one-way entrances to Ravenloft often appear
near an evil thing, and then close again behind it, the number of
pseudo-horrors in the mists can be quite large.

A pseudo-horror is, therefore, not a distinct creature but rather
any monster that has become trapped in the Ravenloft Mists and
is seeking either prey or escape. Most often, they are spectral
things (like ghosts, wraiths, and shadow fiends) although occa-
sional physical monsters (ghouls, vampires, mind flayers, and the
like) are encountered. As a rule, nearly all (85%) of the things a
party of explorers encounters in the Mists of Ravenloft can be as-
sumed to be evil, for such creatures are naturally drawn into the
demiplane of terror. Those creatures that are not evil, however,
are almost certain to be hostile to or wary of strangers, for one
seldom comes across friends in the dreaded Mists of Ravenloft.

 

 
Mummy, Greater

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any desert or subterranean
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Genius (17-18)
TREASURE: V (Ax2)
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 2
MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 8+3
THACO: 11

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 3d6

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (6’ tall)
MORALE: Fanatic (17-18)
XP VALUE: 8,000

Also known as Anhktepot's Children, greater mummies are a
powerful form of undead created when a high-level lawful evil
priest of certain religions is mummified and charged with the
guarding of a burial place. It can survive for centuries as the
steadfast protector of its lair, killing all who would defile its holy
resting place.

Greater mummies look just like their more common cousins
save that they are almost always adorned with (un)holy symbols
and wear the vestments of their religious order. They give off an
odor that is said to be reminiscent of a spice cupboard because of
the herbs used in the embalming process that created them.

Greater mummies are keenly intelligent and are able to com-
municate just as they did in life. Further, they have an inherent
ability to telepathically command all normal mummies created
by them. They have the ability to control other mummies, pro-
vided that they are not under the domination of another mummy,
but this is possible only when verbal orders can be given.

Combat: Greater mummies radiate an aura of fear that causes all
creatures who see them to make a fear check. A modifier is ap-
plied to this fear check based on the age of the monster, as indi-
cated on the Age & Abilities table at the end of this section. The
effects of failure on those who miss their checks are doubled be-
cause of the enormous power and presence of this creature. The
mummy's aura can be defeated by a remove fear, cloak of brav-
ery, or similar spell.

In combat, greater mummies have the option of attacking with
their own physical powers or with the great magics granted to
them by the gods they served in life. In the former case, they may
strike but once per round, inflicting 3d6 points of damage per at-
tack.

Anyone struck by the mummy’s attack suffers the required
damage and becomes infected with a horrible rotting disease that
is even more sinister than that of normal mummies for it mani-
fests itself in a matter of days, not months. The older the mummy,
the faster this disease manifests itself (see the Age & Ability table
at the end of this entry for exact details). The disease causes the
person to die within a short time unless proper medical care can
be obtained. Twenty-four hours after the infecting blow lands,
the character loses 1 point from his Strength and Constitution due
to the effects of the virus on his body. Further, they lose 2 points
of Charisma as their skin begins to flake and whither like old

 

 

 

  
  
  
  
 

 

 

 

parchment. No normal healing is possible while the disease is
spreading through the body, and the shaking and convulsions
that accompany it make spell casting or memorization impossible
for the character. Only one form of magical healing has any
effect—a regenerate spell will cure the disease and restore lost hit
points, but not ability scores. All others healing spells are wasted.
A series of cure disease spells (one for each day that has passed
since the rotting was contracted) will temporarily halt the infec-
tion until a complete cure can be affected. Regaining lost ability
score points is not possible through any means short of a wish.

The body of a person who dies from mummy rot begins to
crumble into dust as soon as death occurs. The only way to resur-
rect a character who dies in this way is to cast both a cure disease
and a raise dead spell on the body within 6 turns (1 hour) of
death. If this is not done, the body (and the spirit within it) are
lost forever.

Greater mummies can be turned by those who have the cour-
age and conviction to attempt this feat; however, the older the
mummy, the harder it is to overcome in this fashion. Once again,
the details are provided on the Age & Abilities Table. They are
immune to damage from holy water, but contact with a holy sym-
bol from a non-evil faith inflicts 1d6 points of damage on them.
Contact with a holy symbol of their own faith actually restores
1d6 hit points.

Perhaps the most horrible aspect of these creatures, however, is
their spell casting ability. All greater mummies were priests in
their past lives and now retain the spell casting abilities they had
then. They will cast spells as if they were of 16th through 20th
level (see below) and will have the same spheres available to them
that they did in life. Greater mummies receive the same bonus
spells for high Wisdom scores that player characters do. Dungeon
Masters are advised to select spells for each greater mummy in an
adventure before the adventure starts. For those using Legends &
Lore in their games, greater mummies are most often priests of
Osiris, Set, and Nephythys. For those using The Complete
Priest's Handbook, they are usually associated with the worship

 
Mummy, Greater

of ancestors, darkness, death, disease, evil, guardianship, and re-
venge. (If neither of these works is being used in the campaign,
simply assign the mummy powers as if it were a standard high-
level cleric.)

Greater mummies can be harmed only by magical weapons,
with older ones being harder to hit than younger ones. Even if a
weapon can affect them, however, it will inflict only half damage
because of the magical nature of the creature's body.

Spells are also less effective against greater mummies than they
are against other creatures. Those that rely on cold to inflict dam-
age are useless against the mummy, while those that depend on
fire inflict normal damage. Unlike normal mummies, these foul
creatures are immune to non-magical fire. The enchanting proc-
ess that creates them, however, leaves them vulnerable to attacks
involving electricity; all spells of that nature inflict half again
their normal damage. In addition, older mummies develop a
magic resistance that makes even those spells unreliable.

Greater mummies, like vampires, become more powerful with
the passing of time in Ravenloft. The following table lists the ap-
plicable changes to the listed statistics (which are for a newly cre-
ated monster) brought on by the passing of time:

Age & Ability Table

Age To Hit AC HD THACO
99 or less +] 2 8+3 11
100-199 +1 1 9+3 11
200-299 +2 0 10*4+3 9

300-399 Pz, -1 11+3 0 9
400-499 +3 -2 123 7

500 or more +4 -3 Ist+3 7

Age Align Wis Magic Disease
99 or less LE 18 Nil 1d12 days
100-199 LE 19 5% 1d10 days
200-299 LEorCE 20 10% 1d8 days
300-399 CY or LE = 21 15% 1d6 days
400-499 CE 22 20% 1d4 days
500 ormore CE 23 25 % 1d3 days
Age Level XP Fear Mummies
99 or less 16 8,000 -1 1d4
100-199 17 10,000 -2 2d4
200-299 18 12,000 -2 3d4
300-399 19 14,000 -3 5d4
400-499 20 16,000 -3 6d4

500 ormore 20 18,000 -4 7d4

Notes:

To Hit indicates the magical plus that must be associated with a
weapon before it will inflict damage to the mummy.

AC is the Armor Class of the monster.

HD are the number of hit dice that the mummy has. Greater
mummies are turned as if they had one more Hit Die than they ac-
tually do, so a 250 year old (10 +3) is turned as if it had 11 Hit
Dice. Any mummy 300 years old or older is turned as a “special”
undead.

THAC0 is listed for the various Hit Dice levels of the mummy
to allow for easy reference during play.

Alignment As the mummy grows older, it becomes darker and
more evil. In cases where two alignments are listed, there is a 75%
chance that the mummy will be of the first alignment and a 25%
chance that it will be of the second. Thus, a 300 year old mummy
is 75% likely to be chaotic evil.

Tt etcalnee>

TTT eel eer

  

 

   

 

v

Wisdom is the creature's Wisdom score. When employing their
spells, greater mummies receive all of the bonus spells normally
associated with a high Wisdom. Further, as they pass into the
higher ratings (19 and beyond) they gain an immunity to certain
magical spells as listed in the Player's Handbook.

Magic is the creature's natural magic resistance. As can be seen
from the table, old mummies can be very deadly indeed.

Disease is the length of time it takes for a person infected with
the mummy’s rotting disease to die.

Level indicates the creature's level as a priest. Older mummies
have access to far greater magics than younger ones and are thus
more dangerous than younger ones.

XP lists the number of experience points awarded to a party for
battling and defeating a greater mummy of a given age.

Mummies indicates the number of normal mummies that the
creature will have serving it when encountered.

Fear indicates the penalty to those making fear checks due to
the evil influence of the greater mummy’s foul aura.

Habitat/Society: Greater mummies are powerful undead crea-
tures that are usually created from the mummified remains of
powerful, evil priests. This being the case, the greater mummy
now draws its mystical abilities from evil powers and darkness.
In rare cases, however, the mummified priests served non-evil
god in life and are still granted the powers they had in life from
those gods.

Greater mummies often dwell in large temple complexes or
tombs where they guard the bodies of the dead from the distur-
bances of grave robbers. Unlike normal mummies, however, they
have been known to leave their tombs and strike out into the
world—bringing a dreadful shroud of evil down upon every land
they touch.

When a greater mummy wishes to create normal mummies as
servants, it does so by mummifying persons infected with its rot-
ting disease. This magical process requires 12-18 hours (10 +2d4)
and cannot be disturbed without ruining the enchantment. Per-
sons to be mummified are normally held or charmed so that they
cannot resist the mummification process. Once the process is
completed, victims are helpless to escape the bandages that bind
them. If nothing happens to free them, they will die of the
mummy rot just as they would have elsewhere. Upon their death,
however, a strange transformation takes place. Rather than
crumbling away into dust, these poor souls rise again as normal
mummies. Obviously, this process is too time consuming to be
used in actual combat, but the greater mummy will often attack a
potential target in hopes of capturing and transforming it into a
mummy. All mummies created by a greater mummy are under its
telepathic command.

Ecology: The first of these creatures is known to have been pro-
duced by Anhktepot, the Lord of Har’akir, in the years before he
became undead himself. It is believed that most, if not all, of the
greater mummies he created in his life were either destroyed or
drawn into Ravenloft with him when he was granted a domain. A
number of these creatures are believed to serve Anhktepot in his
domain, acting as his agents in other lands he wishes to learn
what is transpiring in other portions of Ravenloft.

The process by which a greater mummy is created remains a
mystery to all but Anhktepot. It is rumored that this process in-
volves a great sacrifice to gain the favor of the gods and an oath of
eternal loyalty to the Lord of Har’akir. If the latter is true, then it
may lend credence to the claim of many sages that Anhktepot can
command every greater mummy in existence to do his bidding. If
this is indeed the case, it makes the power of this dark fiend far
greater than is generally supposed.

 

 
Quevari

    

    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any land
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Village
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: A, B, C, or D (Z)
ALIGNMENT: Lawful good or chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1-8

ARMOR CLASS: 10 or 7
MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 1

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d2 or by weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil or see below

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

 

SIZE: M (6' tall)
MORALE: Average (8-10) or Fanatic (17-18)
XP VALUE: 15 or 65

The quevari are a race almost indistinguishable from normal hu-
mans. As arule, they are friendly and helpful people who seem to
go about their lives without concern for the evils that abound in
the land around them. Their true nature is revealed only on the
three nights of the full moon—when they become foul creatures
of the night.

The quevari, as mentioned above, look just like normal hu-
mans. They are fond of bright colors in their clothes and flowers
in their hair. Many observers will quickly notice that the quevari
might well be taken as a light-skinned offshoot of the Vistani.

The quevari language is a sweet and mild sounding one, filled
with musical sounds and a poetic grammar. Those fluent in it
marvel at the easy way its words can be linked together to form
enchanting songs and delicate verse. In addition to this, most
quevari can speak one or two other languages, making communi-
cation with them an easy matter in all but the most unusual of
cases.

Combat: The quevari shun combat when they are in their pacifis-
tic phase. At such times they can be counted on to defend them-
selves and little more. Their primary weapons in such situations
are those they use to hunt—short bows and slings—or those they
use in their labors—sickles and knives. Their natural reluctance
to enter into battle against intelligent opponents, however, im-
poses a —2 penalty on all attack rolls.

On the three nights of the full moon, however, the quevari be-
come bloodthirsty killers who strike with the skill and finesse of
trained assassins. The quevari call this time “the rising of the
bloodmoon” and accept it as an inescapable part of their nature.
Those who are unaware of this side of the quevari personality
(but who have had dealings with them while they were in their
timid phase) suffer a —2 penalty on their initiative roll for the first
round of any combat with these supposedly peaceful people.

Their agility becomes greatly heightened at this time, dropping
their natural armor class from 10 to 7. This increase in agility also
gives them a +2 bonus on all missile fire attack or initiative rolls,
and allows them to move silently, hide in shadows, and hear noise
75% of the time, as if they were thieves. Further, they can climb
sheer surfaces with a 95% chance of success at these times.

 

 

While the weapons the quevari bring to play in combat do not
change, their skill with them does. During the bloodmoon, the
quevari always strike with a +2 on their attack rolls when using a
weapon familiar to them (as described earlier.) If they are using
weapons not found in their daily lives (a war hammer or polearm,
perhaps), they strike normally.

Habitat/Society: Quevari villages tend to be small, farm com-
munities with not more than three or four score inhabitants in
any town. The community will decide on all issues important to
their populations by simple votes or with the aid of an elected
town council. There is nothing about a quevari community that
makes it seem at all different from any other small village—until
the full moon rises. Because of this, most of the people who enter
or travel through a quevari town have no reason to suspect that it
is not a human village. For their part, the quevari are unlikely to
mention the fact that they are not strictly “human” unless asked
directly. Even in this case, however, the quevari will not spell out
the nature of their dark and cyclical psyches.

During the three nights of the full moon, the quevari metabo-
lism and psychology changes. Some scholars liken this to a form
of lycanthropy that affects their minds. The quevari themselves
never speak of this time (thus, they never warn strangers to leave
before the full moon rises) and have learned to block out those
three nights from their lives. While this means nothing to them
(it’s just the way things are, after all) travellers who are staying in
a quevari town at the time of the bloodmoon will be in for a great
surprise.

Ecology: Normally the quevari are a people who live by gathering
nuts and berries, tending their modest farms, and hunting or fish-
ing for the meat they need in their diet. When they are under the
spell of the bloodmoon, however, they are ravenous cannibals
who feast upon the flesh of their victims.

 

 

 
Quickwood

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Quickwood (Spy Tree)
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any/Forests
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Soil nutrients and water
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)
TREASURE: Special
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1 (90%), 2-4 (10%)
ARMOR CLASS: 5
MOVEMENT: 1 (3 for roots)
HIT DICE: 5-10
THACO: 5-6 HD: 15

7-8 HD: 13

9-10 HD: 11
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1d6 +12 and mouth
DAMAGE/ATTACK: Nil and 3-12
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Roots
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Spell channeling
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Special
SIZE: L (12’ +)
MORALE: Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: Variable

This great hardwood tree appears to be an oak, although close in-
spection reveals that it has a visage and sensory organs that re-
semble a distorted human face. It is 90% unlikely that the “face” is
noticed unless the observer is within ten feet of the quickwood.

Combat: As it is very difficult for a quickwood to move its mas-
sive trunk, the creature usually remains still if at all possible. It
can, however, send out thick roots that move 30 feet per round
through the loose top soil (90-foot range). These roots can seize
and hold immobile any creature under 1,000 pounds of weight
(the creature is then drawn to the maw in one round to be chewed
upon). The roots are too strong to be broken, and blunt weapons
do not damage them, but an edged weapon may be used to sever
one. Treat roots as large-sized creatures, with 10 hit points each.
Note that damage inflicted upon roots does not count toward de-
struction of the quickwood proper. The creature allows only six
of its roots to be severed before it withdraws the other 1d6 +6 to
safety. The roots cause no damage.

The limbs of the creature are too stiff to serve as offensive
members, but a quickwood has a mouth-like opening that can
clamp shut for 3d4 points of damage. The victim must be touch-
ing the trunk or forced into position by a nearby grasping root
where the maw can inflict damage before this is an actual danger,
however. The visual, auditory, and olfactory organs (resembling
large human eyes, ears, and nose) are slightly superior to the hu-
man norm, and the creature's infravision extends to 120 feet. The
quickwood has numbers of lesser roots it spreads to sense ap-
proaching creatures. Its sensitive leaves can detect air movements
and changes in pressure.

It is possible to use plant-affecting spells against a quickwood,
but most others do not work. The creature is able to perspire,
drenching itself in water so fire does not harm it. Lightning is
harmlessly channeled off into the ground, and poisons and gases
do not harm a quickwood. A disintegrate spell will certainly de-
stroy one of these things, if successful. However, if under spell at-

 

 

 

Ra -#

tack, a quickwood uses the spell energy to radiate fear in a radius
equal to 10 feet per level of spell energy. If the caster fails his sav-
ing throw, the quickwood has channelled off all of the spell en-
ergy into fear; otherwise the fear is only a side effect of the spell
use, and the magic has standard effects on the spy tree (saving
throws are still permitted, of course). Mind-affecting spells do not
affect a quickwood.

In addition to its own attacks and defenses, a mature spy tree is
able to cause 2d4 other normal oaks to serve as its hosts. These
trees resemble the quickwood while so possessed, having visages
and sensory organs through which the master tree actually con-
trols the hosts and gains information. Such control extends up to
one mile.

Habitat/Society: These creatures may be found in any habitat
that supports normal oak trees, including the warmer regions
where live oaks are found.

Ecology: It is said that quickwoods grow only through the mag-
ical offices of some great wizard (or possibly druid) who planted
mandragora roots after imbuing them with mighty spells. Others
claim that these weird trees are a natural progression of vegetable
life toward sentience and mobility. In any case, quickwoods are
cert sentient, unlike most of the vegetation found in the
world.

Quickwoods are sometimes charmed or otherwise convinced
to serve as repositories for treasure or as guardians of an area. In
the former role, the treasure guarded is typical of the creature
having placed it there. Such items are always stored within the
trunk orifices of the quickwoods. As guardians, the creatures spy
for intruders and upon sighting them send out a hollow drum-
ming sound that can be heard for a mile or more.

 

 

 

 

 
“) CLIMATE/TERRAIN:

Ravenkin

Temperate lands

 

 

 

 

FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Flock

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (15-16)
TREASURE: U (Communal), | (Individual)
ALIGNMENT: Neutral good

NO. APPEARING: 3-12 (3d4)
ARMOR CLASS: 6

MOVEMENT: 3, Fl 27 (C)

HIT DICE: 1

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d3

 

 

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Eye peck & spells
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Not surprised
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (S‘span)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)

XP VALUE: 175

The ravenkin are an avian race that have been trapped within the
misty confines of Ravenloft. They are one of the few forces for
good in this otherwise dark land of evil.

Ravenkin look much like huge versions of the common raven
or crow with a wingspan that averages five feet in width. They
are shrouded in black feathers and have long, straight beaks. To
set themselves apart from normal ravens, they often wear small
items of sparkling jewelry.

The ravenkin speak their own language, which sounds like a
collection of squawks and shrieks to those who do not know it.
Most (fully 80%) of these creatures will also speak the common
language in use by the human or demihuman inhabitants of their
lands.

Combat: The ravenkin will always try to flutter around a victim's
head in combat, waiting for a chance to strike at his eyes. They
will often land briefly on a would-be target before striking, using
their talons to stay in place while they peck with their beaks. But,
as the small talons inflict no damage, the creatures have only one
pecking attack that inflicts but 1d3 points of damage. On any
natural attack roll of 19 or 20, however, the ravenkin has scored a
hit on one of the victim's eyes (assuming they are not wholly
protected.) Such an injury will blind that eye, imposing a —2
penalty on all attack rolls made by the character. A second such
hit indicates loss of the other eye and, thus, total blindness.
Injuries of this nature cannot be cured save by spells like heal or
regeneration.

All ravenkin have a limited spell casting ability. Most (75%)
are able to employ any three first-level spells per day. They need
neither material or somatic components, but always cast their
spells verbally. Ravenkin are required to memorize their spells
ahead of time, just as human casters. An additional 20% of these
creatures have the ability to employ two second-level spells per
day in addition to their first-level spells. Lastly, 5% of the
ravenkin population can invoke one third-level spell per day.

Habitat/Society: The ravenkin are a long-lived race with many of
their elders claiming to be “a hundred winters” old. As a rule, an
individual's name includes his age, so a recently hatched chick
might be “Kareeka Twomoons” and a wise old elder might be
known as “Shreeaka Fiftyautumns.”

   
 

  
  
    
 
 
  
 

>

pel pa se
OAR
Se

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

Ravenkin are slow breeders. It is believed that the evil of
Ravenloft has been corrupting their eggs and making them sterile.
Whether this is the case or not, fully 8 in 10 ravenkin eggs fail to
hatch. A ravenkin community generally consists of 155 to 200
individuals (150 + 5d10). Of these, half will be females (who
fight just as if they were males), and 10% will be young (who do
not fight.) They will nest in family groups, each claiming a copse
of trees as their own territory. In addition, the area around a
ravenkin community tends to be filled with mundane crows,
generally about 500 in number. While the ravenkin cannot
directly command them, they are able to train the crows with
great effectiveness and employ them as sentries and hunting
animals.

Ravenkin tend to ignore travellers unless these actively seek
out contact with the avians. In the latter case, they are wary and
untrusting until the strangers prove themselves to be friends.
Once someone has earned the trust of the ravenkin, though, they
have won a great prize, for these creatures are able to provide a
wealth of information about the evils of Ravenloft. The Vistani
say that ravenkin can see through the eyes of every raven in the
land; from the vast knowledge these folk seem to be able to amass
on even the shortest notice, that seems to be only a minor
exaggeration.

Ecology: The ravenkin exist on a diet of insects, berries, and
carrion. In short, they will eat almost anything put before them
—truly proving themselves to be omnivorous. They find the act
of hunting bothersome, however, and delight in the taste of
slightly rotted meat, making carrion the main element of their
diet.

 

 

 
Reavers

  
 
 

 
 

  
 

pe den eae

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Sea of Sorrows
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: School
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: (A)
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 2-12 (2d6)
ARMOR CLASS: 4
MOVEMENT: 6, Sw 18

HIT DICE: 4+3
THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2d6/2d6/2d4
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Grapple
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Cutting scales
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: M (7’ tall)
MORALE: Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 420

The race of reavers are an evil and dark people who live beneath
the waves on Ravenloft's western shore. Here, they lurk in hopes
of attacking swimmers, fishermen, and small ships. Few indeed
are the coastal communities in Lamordia, Mordent, Demenlieu,
and Darkon that do not have stories of past encounters with these
foul aquatic creatures.

Individual reavers look like tall humanoid creatures covered
with scales. They have large, fish-like eyes and webbed hands
and feet. Their fingers end in short but deadly sharp claws that
can rip through flesh and tissue with ease. Their mouths are wide
and filled with rows of needle-like teeth.

Reavers speak with a lisping, hissing language that is very diffi-
cult for other creatures to match. In addition, many of the sounds
they use to communicate are ultrasonic, so men cannot even hear
them. No reaver has ever been known to speak a human tongue.

Combat: The reaver is not noted for clever tactics and intricate
strategies. As a rule, it is a brutal and savage opponent that tears
its victims into pieces.

In melee, a reaver strikes three times: twice with its claws and
once with its deadly bite. The former attack mode, which com-
bines the great strength of the monster with the cutting edge of its
claws, inflicts 2d6 points of damage. The latter attack combines
the crushing might of the creature's jaws with its deadly, piercing
teeth and inflicts 2d4 points of damage.

If both of the claw attacks hit, the reaver has managed to grap-
ple its opponent and drag him along its scales. The edges of these
small, natural plates are razor sharp, however, making such close
physical contact with the reaver very dangerous. Attackers who
grapple with or are grappled by a reaver will take 1d6 points of
damage each round. Attempting to escape from the grip of the
creature requires a 3d6 ability check against the victim's Strength.
Failure to escape indicates that an additional 1d6 points of dam-
age is taken while a successful escape reduces the damage to 1d4
points. Anyone who enters into unarmed combat will take 1d3
points of damage for each blow he lands on the reaver. Attacks
from weapons that are unusually soft, like whips, will result in
the breaking of the weapon on a natural attack roll of 1, 2, or 3.

Habitat/Society: Reavers tend to gather in schools of a dozen or
so individuals. They are territorial in the extreme and will often
regard any human settlement near their lairs (even those that pre-

 

date the lair’s establishment) as an intrusion upon their territory.
Such “violations” are rewarded with nightly raids on the homes of
the humans. each of these raids is marked by violent acts of terror
targeted at individual households. In this way, the reavers hope to
drive the “invaders” from the lands that border on their ocean
realms.

A reaver lair is often hidden beneath a coral reef or at the heart
of a thick forest of sea weed. In such isolated regions, the reavers
are masters of stealth and hunting. Those who stumble upon
these evil places seldom have time to see the creatures as they
seem to spring out of nowhere to attack and destroy all intruders.

Ecology: Reavers feed on the raw flesh of their victims. They are
strictly carnivorous and, oddly enough, feed only on land-
dwelling creatures and sea mammals. Reavers look upon intelli-
gent prey as far more worthy than simple animal life. Thus, they
will often pass up other targets to strike at a wandering band of
humans or demihumans. After they have feasted on the bodies of
their victims, they often leave behind a grisly scene of blood and
death—to mark their successful hunt and warn off those who
might seek to hunt them down in a quest for vengeance.

Outcasts

From time to time, an individual reaver is exiled from his peo-
ple for one reason or another (usually failure in an important
task). These outcasts leave the salty sea water behind and find a
fresh water lake or river in which to live. Thus, even inland com-
munities are not always safe from these evil creatures. Outcasts
have the same statistics as other reavers.

  

 

 

 

 
Scarecrow, Ravenloft

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any farmland
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Non-(0)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 8
MOVEMENT: 2

HIT DICE: 3

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4 or by weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: M (6' tall)
MORALE: Fearless (19-20)
XP VALUE: 420

The Ravenloft scarecrow is a magically-animated creature that
moves about under the influence of an evil force. Usually found
only in agricultural regions, it is often the chosen form of a venge-
ful farmer's spirit.

The appearance of these creatures varies, since the bodies they
enter and animate are all built by different people and reflect the
artistic talents and tastes of their creator. As a rule, however, the
scarecrow's body is an assemblage of old clothes, stuffed with
leaves, straw, or some other filling material and braced up on a
wooden support. Some manner of gourd or melon is generally
placed atop the body after being hollowed out and carved to re-
semble a haunting, frightening face. When the creature is ani-
mated, the face glows from within as if a candle or lantern were
placed inside its hollow head.

Scarecrows are able to speak any language they knew in life.
There is even a small chance (10%) that anyone who in life knew
the individual whose spirit inhabits the scarecrow will recognize
and identify that evil soul when listening to the creature's eerie,
haunting voice.

Combat: The scarecrow exists only to exact vengeance on those
who wronged it in life. As such, it tends to avoid combat with
others and will often flee from encounters with those it does not
know. When it finally comes across someone it blames for an act
committed against it in life, it attacks quickly and savagely—
refusing to retreat until either it or its victim is slain.

The scarecrow’s main hand-to-hand attack is made with its
flailing arms. This attack is only mildly harmful, however, be-
cause the creature is not noted for great strength. Each successful
attack will inflict but 1d4 points of damage. From time to time, a
scarecrow will attack with some manner of farm implement (usu-
ally a pitch fork or scythe). In such cases, it does damage accord-
ing to the weapon employed.

The real danger presented by a scarecrow is the fact that any-
one struck for its rather weak blows must save vs. death magic.
Failure to make the save will find the victim cursed with an magi-
cal odor that draws biting and stinging insects to him from miles
away. On the round after the failed saving throw, the victim takes
1d4 points of damage from bites and stings. On the next round,
the victim takes 2d4 points of damage, then 3d4, and so on. This
affect can be negated only by the casting of a remove curse spell.
In addition to the damage sustained, a cursed character suffers a

 

 

penalty of —1 on all attack rolls for each die of damage inflicted
by the insects on that turn. For example, on the first round in
which the character is bitten and stung, he is at —1 on all attacks
rolls and takes 1d4 points of damage. Four rounds later, he takes
5d4 points of damage and suffers a —5 on his attack rolls.

Scarecrows are immune to the effects of cold-based spells and
take only half damage from all lightning-or electricity-based
spells. They suffer full damage from all non-magical fire attacks.
All magical flame attacks receive a +1 on their attack roll and a
+1 per die on their damage roll. Non-magical weapons can hit
them, but these inflict only 1 point of damage per blow landed.
Magical weapons not employing fire inflict half damage while
those using fire (i.e., a Flame Tongue) gain a +1 on all attack rolls
and a +1 per die on all damage rolls.

While they are similar to undead creatures, scarecrows cannot
be turned. They are, however, immune to sleep, charm, hold, or
similar mind-based magical influences.

Habitat/Society: The Ravenloft scarecrow is an animated form of
the mundane farm construct. The spirit that drives it to commit
acts of evil is often that of a local resident who feels that he was
wronged by one or more of his neighbors in life. Unable to attain
justice while he was alive, his spirit lingers on after his death and
becomes a powerful force for evil.

Ecology: Ravenloft scarecrows are magically animated con-
structs. Although they are fashioned out of organic materials,
there is no evidence to support a belief that they have any role in
the ecosphere around them.

 

 

 
Shadow Fiend

 

 

 

>

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Lower planes
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Special
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 9,5, orl
MOVEMENT: 12 (see below)
HIT DICE: 7+3
THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d6/1d6/1d8
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below
SIZE: M (6'tall)
MORALE: Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: 2,000

The shadow fiend is a dark and dangerous creature from the most
dreaded of the lower planes. Lurking in regions of darkness, it at-
tacks only to satisfy its desire to do evil, for it never hungers or
thirsts.

The shadow fiend looks like a tall, slender humanoid with
small bat-like wings and a body is composed wholly of darkness.
Both the long fingers and slender toes of the creature end in terri-
ble claws that can inflict great wounds on enemies.

Shadow fiends have no known language, although it is said
that they can communicate with other creatures from the lower
planes when they encounter them. No mortal being has ever been
able to attest to this, however, and it may be mere speculation.

Combat: The unusual nature of these creatures is evident in their
combat tactics. Like the shadows, which many believe (wrongly)
to be related creatures, these horrors are 90% undetectable when
they move through dimly lit or shadowy. When they attack those
who have not spotted them, they always attain surprise. Each
round the monster is able to strike with two of its wicked claws
(inflicting 1d6 points of damage each) and its horrible bite (inflict-
ing 1d8 points or damage.)

Once engaged in combat, the power of the creature depends
upon the lighting in the area of battle. In brightly lit areas (open
sunlight, a continual light spell, and such), the shadow fiend is
greatly weakened. Here, its Armor Class is 9 and all attacks that
strike it do double damage. Because of this, shadow fiends will
normally flee from opponents in bright light.

In dimmer lighting, that created by a torch, lantern, or light
spell, the shadow fiend is somewhat better off. Here, it has an ar-
mor class of 5, though it still suffers normal damage from attacks.
When it strikes in these conditions, however, it gains a +1 on its
attack rolls.

In darkness, anything up to candle or moonlight, the creature
is at its deadliest. Here, it gains a +2 on all attack rolls and is Ar-
mor Class 1. Further, all damage done to the creature is halved.

Regardless of the lighting around it, the shadow fiend is im-
mune to all damage from fire, cold, and electricity (whether mag-
ical or mundane in nature.) A light spell cast directly at the
creature inflicts 1d6 points per level of the caster, although this
damage may be reduced (or enhanced) by the lighting in the area.

 

 

 

 

Whenever the shadow fiend gains surprise, it will spring onto
its victim. Because of the small wings on its back, it can leap up to
30 feet and strike with four claws (each doing 1d6 points of dam-
age.) When it leaps, it cannot employ its bite attack.

Once per day, the shadow fiend may cast a darkness, 15’ radius
spell or subject all persons within a 30 foot area to a fear spell.
Once per week, it can cast a magic jar spell at a single target (pro-
vided that it has a suitable receptacle for the victim at hand.) If
the victim of the magic jar attack makes his saving throw, how-
ever, the shadow fiend is stunned for 1d3 rounds during which
time it cannot act.

Shadow fiends can be turned by clerics as if they were “special”
creatures on the undead turning chart.

Habitat/Society: The shadow fiend is called into Ravenloft by the
use of magical gate spells and similar incantations. Once sum-
moned to the demiplane of terror, however, they find themselves
bound to the land and unable to leave (as is the case with all sum-
moned beings.) Thus, over the centuries, a number of these crea-
tures have been trapped in Ravenloft.

Already creatures of evil, their imprisonment only serves to in-
crease their hatred of the world around them. Thus, they often at-
tempt to pass their time by inflicting pain and suffering on those
few mortals they encounter.

Ecology: It is doubtful that the shadow fiend is important to the
overall ecology of Ravenloft. However, there are those who say
that the Dark Powers have close ties to these foul creatures,
claiming that the Powers are able command the fiends to do their
bidding at any time. Since none can even pretend to predict the
actions or guess the desires of the Dark Powers, it seems possible
that this is the case.

 

 
 

Skeleton, Giant

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Non-(0)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 2-8 (2d4)
ARMOR CLASS: 4
MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 4+4
THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d12
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: L (12' tall)
MORALE: Fearless (20)
XP VALUE: 1,400

Giant skeletons are similar to the more common undead skeleton,
but they have been created with a combination of spells and are,
thus, far more deadly than their lesser counterparts.

Giant skeletons stand roughly 12 feet tall and look to be made
from the bones of giants. In actuality, they are simply human
skeletons that have been magically enlarged. They are normally
armed with long spears or scythes that end in keen bone blades.
Rare individuals will be found carrying shields (and thus have an
Armor Class of 3), but these are far from common. A small, mag-
ical fire burns in the chest of each giant skeleton, a by-product of
the magics that are used to make them. These flames begin just
above the pelvis and reach upward to lick at the collar bones.
Mysteriously, no burning or scorching occurs where the flames
touch the bone.

Giant skeletons do not communicate in any way. They can
obey simple, verbal commands given to them by their creator,
but will ignore all others. In order for a command to be under-
stood by these animated skeletons, it must contain no more than
three distinct concepts. For example, “stay in this room, make
sure that nobody comes in, and don’t allow the prince to leave,”.
would be the type of command these creatures could obey.

Combat: In melee combat, giant skeletons most frequently attack
with their bone-bladed scythes or spears. Each blow that lands in-
flicts 1d12 points of damage.

Once per hour (6 turns), a skeleton may reach into its chest and
draw forth a sphere of fire from the flames that burn within its rib
cage. This flaming sphere can be hurled as if it were a fireball that
delivers 8d6é points of damage. Because these creatures are im-
mune to harm from both magical and normal fires, they will free-
ly use this attack in close quarters.

Giant skeletons are immune to sleep, charm, hold, or similar
mind-affecting spells. Cold-based spells inflict half damage to
them, lightning inflicts full damage, while fire (as has already
been mentioned) cannot harm them. They suffer half damage
from edged or piercing weapons and but 1 point of damage per
die from all manner of arrows, quarrels, or missiles. Blunt melee
weapons inflict full damage on them.

Being undead, giant skeletons can be turned by priests and pal-
adins. They are more difficult to turn than mundane skeletons,
however, being treated as if they were mummies. Holy water that
is splashed upon them inflicts 2d4 points of damage per vial.

 

Habitat/Society: The first giant skeletons to appear in Ravenloft
were created by the undead priestess Radaga in her lair within the
domain of Kartakass. Others have since mastered the spells and
techniques required to create these monsters; thus, giant skele-
tons are gradually beginning to appear in other realms where the
dead and undead lurk.

Giant skeletons are employed as guards and sentinels by those
with the power to create them. It is said that the Dark Powers can
see everything that transpires before the eyes of these foul autom-
atons, but there is no proof supporting this rumor.

Ecology: Like lesser animated skeletons, these undead things have
no true claim to any place in nature. They are created from the
bones of those who have died and are abominations in the eyes of
all who belief in the sanctity of life and goodness.

The process by which giant skeletons are created is dark and
evil. Attempts to manufacture them outside of Ravenloft have
failed, so it is clear that they are in some way linked to the Dark
Powers themselves. In order to create a giant skeleton, a spell
caster must have the intact skeleton of a normal human or demi-
human. On a night when the land is draped in fog, they must cast
an animate dead, produce fire, enlarge, and a resist fire spell over
the bones. When the last spell is cast, the bones lengthen and
thicken and the creatures rises up. The the creator must make a
Ravenloft Powers check for his part in this evil undertaking.

 

 
Strahd’s Skeletal Steeds

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any Barovia
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night
DIET: Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Non-(0)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1-10
ARMOR CLASS: 7
MOVEMENT: 18

HIT DICE: 3+1
THACO: 17

NO, OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d6/1d6/1d4
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: L (8’ tall)
MORALE: Fearless (19-20)
XP VALUE: 270

Strahd’s skeletal steeds are magically animated undead horses,
created as guardians and warriors by the master vampire Strahd
Von Zarovich.

Completely stripped of flesh, skeletal steeds are held together
by magic. They wear the tattered remains of whatever saddles or
blankets may have been on them when they died. Thus, many
will wear nothing at all while rare individuals might actually
wear the remnants of barding (improving their armor class ac-
cordingly.) Any horse shoes they may have had in life are still on
their hooves; however, the enchantment that raised these crea-
tures from the dead gives those shoes a magical aura that causes
illusionary flames to flicker around the steed’s hooves when it
breaks into a gallop.

Unlike normal, living horses, which are rarely still and always
shifting and twitching, Strahd’s skeletal steeds are completely
motionless until they need to act. Many times they are encoun-
tered as a mere pile of dusty horse bones. If given a command by
Strahd or upon the activation of some trigger magic, they can rise
up and assemble. The mere sight of this is enough to require those
viewing it to make a horror check.

They have no strong odor, other than a faint trace of dust and
mold. They sound hollow and light when in motion and the clat-
ter of their hooves sounds more like a rattle of sticks than the
pounding of horses.

Combat: Strahd's skeletal steeds fight like normal war horses.
Each round, the creature rears up and can both strike with its
hooves and bite. On the second round of combat, and every other
round thereafter, they can breathe a cloud of noxious gas in an ar-
ea five feet wide and deep in front of them. Anyone caught in it
must save vs. breath weapon or be frozen to the spot for 2-8 (2d4)
rounds.

Like all undead, they are immune to sleep, charm, hold, and
other mind-controlling spells. Piercing weapons such as spears
and arrows do no damage to them for they just slide between the
bones. Edged weapons, like swords and axes, will inflict only half
damage, while blunt weapons (including polearms and the like
used as quarterstaves) can inflict normal damage.

 

 

 

 

Strahd's skeletal steeds are totally immune to cold- or fire-
based attacks, but take full damage from lightning and electricity-
based spells. Further, their creator has greatly strengthened their
ties to the negative plane. This makes them harder to turn (they
are turned as wraiths), but also makes them vulnerable to the
damaging effects of a negative plane protection spell.

Habitat/Society: Strahd’s skeletal steeds are found in the dark cat-
acombs beneath Barovia’s surface, on old battlefields, or any-
where within Castle Ravenloft. Strahd has been known to post
them as sentries throughout Barovia. He never uses them as
mounts, but has been known to use them as couriers. Thus, such
a creature might well be encountered while on an important mis-
sion to deliver some vital message or object for the Lord of Baro-
via.

As mindless undead creatures, skeletal steeds have no society.
They obey any orders given to them by Strahd. The commands
must be simple, a single sentence of no more than a few words.
They only obey Strahd Von Zarovich unless some magical means
(like a control undead spell) is used to usurp command of a spe-
cific creature. In this case, however, Strahd will know at once
that something has happened to one of his steeds.

Ecology: As undead things, Strahd’s skeletal steeds are not a part
of nature. Further, only Strahd Von Zarovich knows the arcane
ritual necessary to make them. He can make them only from
horse skeletons where 90% of the bones and the skull are present.
It is not know if other animals can be animated from the same
spell, but given the power of the Lord of Barovia, and his ties to
the evil forces of necromancy, this seems probable.

 

 

 

 
Treant, Evil

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any forest
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Grove
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)
TREASURE: Q (x5), X
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1-20
ARMOR CLASS: 0
MOVEMENT: 12
HIT DICE: 7-12
THACO: 7-8HD: 13
9-10 HD: 11
11-12 HD: 9
NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: Variable
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil
SIZE: H (13-18’)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 2,000 ( +1,000/HD)

The peaceful race of treants, found on many worlds and in many
lands, is also represented in Ravenloft. Sadly, the dark waters and
corrupting evil of the land has twisted them into evil and foul
things. The treants of Ravenloft despise good and innocent things
as much as their counterparts hate evil; they go to great lengths to
torment and terrorize travellers in their domains. The only trait
they seem to share with the true treant is a hatred of unchecked or
unrestricted use of fire.

Evil treants look much like normal trees; so much so, in fact,
that when standing in a grove or forest they have a 90% chance of
being mistaken for common flora. Their bark is thick and
gnarled, providing them with protection from physical damage.
While they have a face that looks unsettlingly human when they
are speaking, it vanishes into patterns of grooves and knots when
the creature wishes to remain stationary. Evil treants come in
three age groups: young (13 to 14 feet tall), mature (15 to 16 feet
tall), and elder (17 to 18 feet tall). In combat, the amount of dam-
age inflicted by a treant is determined by its age and size.

Evil treants can speak their own language and can usually com-
municate with the animals in the forest around them. They are
also often capable of speaking a fair number (1-4) of other lan-
guages.

Combat: Young treants can lash out with their powerful branches
to strike twice in combat, inflicting 2d8 points of damage per
blow landed. Mature treants are able to inflict even more danger-
ous wounds, inflicting 3d6 points of damage with each attack. El-
der treants have amassed so much physical power that their
attacks deliver fully 4d6 points of damage each. Few and far be-
tween are the creatures that can stand against them in combat.
Despite the thick bark that provides them with protection
against physical assaults, treants are unusually vulnerable to fire.
Any weapon or attack based on fire (magical or normal) receives
a +4 bonus on its attack roll. Further, such attacks score an addi-
tional +1 point per die to all damage inflicted. Saving throws re-
quired for fire-based attacks and spells are made at a ~4 penalty.
Like their good counterparts, evil treants can animate and com-
mand living trees. Each treant can animate two trees. This power
has a range of 60 yards, and any animated tree that moves be-
yond that limit is instantly returned to its normal state. After

 

 

 

 

spending one round to uproot itself, an animated tree is able to
move about and attack as if it were a mature treant.

Because of their mass and strength, treants are quite effective in
combat against structures and fortifications—especially those
made from wood. Exact details on this aspect of combat are pro-
vided in The Castle Guide and BATTLESYSTEM™ miniatures
rules, where they are considered to be identical to good treants.

Habitat/Society: Evil treants live in secluded forests like those
found in the mountains of southwestern Ravenloft. Here, they
warp the nature of what might otherwise be peaceful and pictur-
esque woodlands, turning them into evil, haunted forests.

Evil treants have no interest in treasures, magical or monetary,
although items of value are sometimes found on the ground
where they have claimed the lives of past victims. Only in very
rare cases will an evil treant attempt to use any of these artificial
items as they prefer to leave them where they fell and use them as
bait to lure curious explorers to their deaths.

Ecology: Unlike good treants, who feed wholly by photosynthe-
sis, evil treants are carnivorous. In fact, they favor the flesh of in-
telligent creatures (usually humans and demihumans) over all
other prey. Their chosen delicacy, when they can obtain it, is the
flesh of innocents, who they torment and horrify before devour-
ing. Evil treants rarely kill their prey before consuming it, for
they believe that this makes it unfit for digestion. Thus, victims
who are accidentally slain during the tortures inflicted upon them
by hungry treants are discarded and left to feed the scavengers of
the forest.

The sap of an evil treant, when smeared over the entire body, is
reported to provide humans and demihumans with protection
equivalent to that granted by a barkskin spell.

 

 
Treant, Undead

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any forest
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Copse
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night
DIET: Blood
INTELLIGENCE: High (13-14)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1-4
ARMOR CLASS: 0
MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 15
THACO: 5

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 5d6/5d6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: H (20' tall)
MORALE: Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: 15,000

When an evil treant sees that its many years are soon to come to
an end, it seldom accepts this fate quietly. For most, this means a
final, wild orgy of violence and death. For a few, however, it
means death and resurrection as a thing so dark and evil that even
the Vistani will not speak of it.

An undead treant looks much like any other deciduous tree in
the winter. It has no leaves and a lusterless, almost brittle, look to
its bark, Like living treants, its face is hidden until it chooses to
speak or make its presence known. When a creature of this sort
stands amid a grove or copse of similar leafless trees, it is 90%
likely to go unnoticed by those passing near.

Undead treants speak the language of evil treants and generally
know many (2d4) other tongues. Despite their linguistic skills,
however, they seldom converse with the living and seem unable
to speak with the animals of the forest around them.

Combat: Undead treants lash out with their powerful branches,
striking twice per round and inflicting 5d6 points of damage with
each successful blow. On any natural roll of 19 or 20, they are as-
sumed to have knocked their opponent prone and stunned them
for 1 round per 5 points (or fraction thereof) of damage inflicted.
Thus, a blow delivering 18 points of damage would stun a charac-
ter for 4 rounds.

If the treant is not otherwise engaged in combat, it will move
beside the fallen form and feed upon the blood of the victim. To
do this, the treant must remain stationary for 1 round. On the sec-
ond round, it sprouts 3d4 root-like appendages that snake out
and bury themselves in the victim’s flesh. These inflict 1 point of
damage each and allow the monster to begin feeding on the third
round. Starting then, and on each subsequent round, the creature
will drain 1d3 points of blood for each root sunk into the victim.

Anyone being drained of blood by the treant is rendered immo-
bile as the coils of roots encircle his body. Individuals so en-
trapped can only escape the deadly embrace of these vampiric
trees with the aid of a third party. In order to end the blood drain-
ing, the treant’s roots must be cut away. They are treated as armor
class 5 and any successful attack will break the tendril. If all of the
tendrils are cut, the victim can work his way free in two rounds
(one with outside help.) When an undead treant stops feeding, ei-
ther because it has drained its victim of blood or because all of its
tendrils have been severed, it reauires a full round to become mo-
bile again. During this time, or whenever it is feeding, all attacks

 

 

 

 

 

against the creature gain a +2 bonus.

Like other treants, the undead variety are vulnerable to fire.
All fire-based attacks gain a +4 bonus on their attack rolls and in-
flict an extra 2 points per die of damage.

Undead treants are unable to animate other trees, but they are
known to employ magic. All undead treants have the spell casting
powers of a level 2-6 (2d3) druid. Because of their own vulnerabil-
ity to flames and fires, however, they will never employ any
spells that use any kind of fire. Undead treants require the same
verbal and somatic components that other spell casters do, but
never need to employ material components unless they are vital
to the operation of the spell (a goodberry, for example.)

Undead treants are immune to spells like sleep, charm, or hold,
as are all undead, but also have several other immunities that set
them above the rest of the living dead. Holy water, for example,
has no effect on them, and they cannot be turned by priests or
paladins. They are also untouched by sunlight and cannot be af-
fected by spells like control undead or control plants.

Habitat/Society: Undead treants tend to live in small copses of
dead trees with no more than four individuals in any given area.
Their foul aura permeates the copse around them, making the
woods they inhabit dark and evil places.

It is not uncommon for individual undead treants to still be
members the evil treant community they once lived in. When this
is the case, the undead treant will be treated with the respect due
to a powerful leader and will clearly be in command of the others.

Ecology: Undead treants seem to be a natural stage in the life cy-
cle of some evil treants. No doubt this is given as a “reward” for
their evil lives by the Dark Powers.

 

 

 

 

 
 

Valpurgeist

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any land
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-12)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 4
MOVEMENT: Q

HIT DICE: 5

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d6/1d6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Strangulation
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: M (6' tall)
MORALE: Average (8-10)
XP VALUE: 650

The valpurgeist, or hanged man, is an undead creature that is
sometimes manifested when an innocent man or woman is
wrongly hanged for a crime. Unable to prove its innocence in life,
the spirit returns after death to claim the lives of those who sent it
to the gallows.

Valpurgeists are clearly human in appearance, although they
are far from able to pass as normal men. Their necks have clearly
been broken, causing the head to hang at an awkward angle and
flop about loosely as the creature moves. Further, the skin of the
creature has taken on the pallor of the dead and an odor of decay
hangs heavy in the air around the thing.

The valpurgeist cannot speak and seems unwilling or unable to
listen to the words of others. Attempts at communication that do
not involve magic (a speak with dead spell, for example) are
doomed to failure. Those who do manage to speak with the crea-
ture will find that it is wholly obsessed with exacting revenge and
destroying those who have wronged it.

Combat: The valpurgeist attacks with its two powerful fists. The
essence of darkness that has animated it has given it incredible
strength, so that each blow it lands inflicts 1d6 points of damage.

If both of its fists strike the target, it is assumed to have gottena
solid grip on the throat of its victim and will begin to strangle him
or her. Escaping from the creature's grip requires a successful roll
to bend bars.

Beginning on the round after its vice-like grip has locked onto
its victim, the creature automatically inflicts 1d8 points of dam-
age without making another attack roll. Further, the victim must
make a saving throw vs. paralysis or fall unconscious from lack
of oxygen. Those who do fall unconscious will die on the next
round, suffering a crushed windpipe and broken neck, if they are
not freed by a third party. The only ways to free a character who
is being strangled from the deadly grip of the valpurgeist are to
pry the choking hands from their throat (a roll to bend bars is re-
quired) or distract the monster from its current victim. The latter
method is very difficult, for there is but a 1% chance per point of
damage inflicted that the monster will release someone in its grip
and attack another character. If it does release its hold, it will al-
ways attack the person who distracted it.

Cutting the arms off of the monster will not cause them to re-
lease their victim, for their muscles will remain locked and the
hands will continue to strangle the character.

 

Valpurgeists can be turned as if they were ghasts and suffer 1d4
points of damage per vial of holy water splashed on them. They
are immune to sleep, charm, hold, and similar spells, but can be
affected normally by all spells that are intended for use against
undead.

A valpurgeist can be freed of its burden of guilt (and thus al-
lowed to rest in peace) if evidence can be found that will prove the
being’s innocence in the case for which it was hanged. If the mon-
ster's spirit is not appeased in this way, it will return to plague its
accusers time and time again, no matter what steps are taken to
destroy it or its physical form. Thus, even if the entire body of the
valpurgeist is destroyed with acid, it will reassemble itself and be-
gin its quest for vengeance anew. Returning to life after being de-
stroyed requires 2d4 days if the body is intact or twice that if the
body is destroyed in some way.

Habitat/Society: Valpurgeists are lonely souls who have felt the
cold injustice of a world that would not believe their pleas of in-
nocence. Because of this, they will have no kinship with any liv-
ing thing in their afterlife.

While the valpurgeist is no more or less intelligent than he was
in life, all of his mental faculties are now centered on revenge.
Thus, he will work methodically, and often quite shrewdly, to ar-
range for the demise of those he considers his enemies.

Even the death of all those involved with the creature's trial and
execution cannot free the spirit from its agony. Once it has slain
all those who wronged it, the creature simply begins to widen the
scope of its evil. The only way to free the world of a valpurgeist's
cursed presence is to prove its innocence, thus removing the anger
that taints its spirit.

Ecology: Like all undead, valpurgeists have no place in the natu-
ral world. They are simply products of evil and darkness.

 
 

 

 

 

Vampire, Dwarf a wl Lee

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any subterranean
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Special
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)
TREASURE: F

ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 0

MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 9+3

THACO: 11

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4 or by weapon (+ Str bonus)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: S (4’tall)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)

XP VALUE: 3,000 (+1,000 per 100 years of age)

Dwarves are a long lived race with an intense cultural hatred of
the undead and their evil work. They regard death as the just re-
wards of a warrior and the undead would cheat a hero of his glo-
rious end, For this reason, a dwarven vampire is perhaps the most
awful of things, for its natural hatred of what it has become leads
it to do great acts of evil.

Dwarven vampires, like all vampires, look much as they did in
life. They are short and stocky, with long, white or silver beards,
and heavy, rounded features. In most cases, they retain the trap-
pings of the profession they held in life; a dwarven vampire who
was a warrior would often be found in full armor with a heavy
battle axe or war hammer close at hand.

Dwarven vampires retain the knowledge of languages that they
had in life. There is no language specific to these creatures save
the dwarven tongue that served them before their deaths.

Combat; Dwarven vampires retain the courage and vigor that
marked them in life. As such, they are deadly warriors who will
often battle opponents for the sheer love of combat. Often, they
will wield the weapons they loved in life, doing damage based on
the type of weapon employed. Further, their status as undead has
greatly magnified their physical power in most cases, so that all
dwarven vampires are assumed to have a Strength score of 18/76.
This gives them a natural bonus of +2 on all melee attack rolls
and +4 on all melee damage. Vampire dwarves retain their natu-
ral combat advantage ( +1 on all attack rolls) when battling orcs,
goblins, hobgoblins, and so forth. Similarly, large creatures (like
ogres and trolls) suffer a -4 on their attack rolls against these
smaller creatures. This ability exactly matches that presented in
the Player's Handbook.

The most feared attack mode of these dark creatures, however,
is their vitality drain. Each successful unarmed melee attack al-
lows the vampire to drain 2 points of Constitution from its vic-
tim. This loss is permanent and will instantly modify the
character's hit points and other related scores. Any character re-
duced to a Constitution score of 0 is instantly slain and will rise
aia as a vampire (of the appropriate type) in 3 days (see Ecol-
ogy).

Dwarven vampires have the natural racial abilities of dwarves:
detecting grades, slopes, or newly constructed stonework 5 times
in 6, detecting sliding or shifting walls or rooms 4 times in 6, and
detecting stonework traps (including pits and deadfalls) or deter-

 

 

 

 

mining their approximate depth underground 3 times in 6.

Like their strength, the natural Constitution and inherent mag-
ic resistance of these creatures has also been increased by their
contact with the negative material plane. While this gives the
vampire a +5 bonus on all saving throws vs. wands, rods, staffs,
and spells, it also makes it impossible for them to employ magical
items. Being undead, of course, poison has no affect on them at
all.

Dwarven vampires do not have the natural charm ability of
human vampires, but are able to strike fear into the hearts of their
enemies with but a gaze. In any combat round, the creature may
employ this attack on any single foe, requiring them to make a
fear check. Failure indicates that they have met the monster's gaze
and been filled with supernatural fear and revulsion. Due to the
power of this enchantment, the victim suffers a -2 penalty on this
check.

While the vampire dwarf had a natural infravision in life, death
has rewarded him with a far greater sense of sight. In addition to
his normal 60 foot infravision, the vampire dwarf can see in all
but absolute darkness as if it were full daylight.

Vampire dwarves are even more resistant to physical and magi-
cal attacks than normal vampires. They can be hit only by +2 or
better magical weapons, with all others passing harmlessly
through them as if they were no more than vapor. Even if struck
and harmed by weapons or spells, a vampire dwarf regenerates 4
hit points per round when in any subterranean area. Above
ground, they regenerate only 1 point per round. If reduced to zero
hit points, a vampire dwarf is not slain. Rather, it is forced to em-
ploy its stone walking and flee the combat. If it is unable to reach
its coffin within 12 turns, the vampire merges with the stone
around it and is destroyed. If it does reach its coffin, the foul vam-
pire enters it and, after resting for eight hours, is restored to full
health and power.

Holy water has no affect on these creatures, but water of a nat-
ural spring burns them for 2d4 points of damage per round. Im-
mersion in a pool of water fed wholly by natural springs will

 
Vampire

 

  
 

wis {NM

  

  
 
  

NEA

 

 

 

Both the Monstrous Compendium and the RAVENLOFIT™ Boxed
Set go into great detail about vampires. The information pre-
sented in this overview is intended to compliment, clarify, and en-
hance the text presented elsewhere.

Vampires in Ravenloft

Of all the dark and evil things that move about in the mists of
Ravenloft, none is more feared than the vampire. These creatures
can often move freely about in the world of men and, as such, are
all the more dreadful. Their unexpected attacks often target the
innocent and helpless, leaving little hope that a victim will sur-
vive to lead would-be vampire hunters to the monster. All-in-all,
they are certainly the darkest of the dark.

Ravenloft is home to many vampires, some of whom are even
lords of their own domains. Strahd Von Zarovich, the master of
Barovia, is one such creature. His darkness is so great that many
believe the land itself to be tied directly to him. This may or may
not be true, but the Vistani and Lord Azalin of Darkon certainly
seem to believe it. Other vampire lords, like Duke Gundar of
Gundarak, are certainly powerful—but none can compare to the
might or the evil that is Strahd’s.

Becoming a Vampire

As described in the RAVENLOFT Boxed Set, there are three
ways to become a vampire. Each of these paths to darkness has its
own unique character, but the end result is always a creature of
unsurpassed evil and power.

The first path, generally known as that of deadly desire, is per-
haps the most awful. In this case, the individual who is destined
to become a vampire actually wishes to cross over and become
undead. While it has been said that they must sacrifice their lives
to attain this goal, a greater cost is often paid. Those who desire
to live eternally and feed on the life essences of their fellow men
must give up a portion of their spirits to the Dark Powers them-
selves. In this way, they are granted the powers of the undead, but
also stripped of the last vestiges of their humanity. In the centuries
to come, many find this loss too great to bear and seek out their
own destruction.

The second path, that of the curse, is often the most insidious of
the three. In this case, the individual is often unaware that he or
she is destined to become a thing of the night. The transformation
into “unlife” might occur because of a potent curse laid down by
someone who has been wronged by the victim. Occasionally, an
individual might find that he or she has inherited (or found) a
beautiful and alluring magical ring—only to find that it cannot be
removed and that the character is slowly . . . changing. There are
those who accept this curse and embrace their new existence as a
vampire, while others despise the things they have become. In
nearly every case, these are the most passionate and “alive” exam-
ples of this evil race.

The final, and surely most tragic, path to vampirism is that of
the victim. This is the route most commonly taken to vampirism,
for it is the way in which those slain by a vampire become vam-
pires themselves. Vampires created in this way almost always de-
test themselves and the creature that made them what they are.
More information on this type of vampire is presented in the next
section, which details the relationship of such creatures to their
masters. All-in-all, the victims of other vampires are unhappy in
their new lives, for few ever accept their fates happily—and many
do not have the strength of character to seek an end to their
wretched “unlives”.

Vampire Masters & Slaves

When a vampire decides to create new slaves, it does so by tak-
ing their lives in some special way. For most, it is simply the drain-
ing of their life energies or the drinking of their blood. Whatever
the end result, if the victim dies from the feeding of the beast, he
or she rises again as a vampire. At this point, the victim of the at-
tack is enslaved by the vampire that created it.

The newly created monster seldom has any fraction of its mas-
ter's power and is thus unable to challenge its master's authority.
Further, the master exerts a powerful form of charm over its sub-
jects that prevents them from acting to destroy it. This does not,
however, mean that the vampire's minions cannot act to under-
mine the vampire's plans in minor ways, only that they must do
as they are ordered by their lord. Unlike the limitations of a tradi-
tional charm, the vampire's power enables him to order his slaves
to destroy their loved ones or act against their own self interest
without resistance.

Vampire Companions

As the years pass, vampires often find that their greatest ene-
mies are not would-be heroes, but time and boredom. The im-
mortality they may once have craved now looks like a bleak and
endless chain of suffering that they must wear eternally. To ease
their misery, many vampires seek out a special companion. The
most commonly encountered form of this is regarded, by those
unfamiliar with the depth of the bond to be established, in the
same way that they might look upon any normal person taking a
wife or husband. In truth, there is far more to this process.

The process of vampiric bonding is as murky as the fog that of-
ten shrouds the vampire’s movement. When the vampire decides
to take a companion, it generally (although not always) seeks out
an individual of the opposite sex that reminds them of someone
they loved in life. The vampire repeatedly visits the victim, feed-
ing on them until they are at the point of death. At the last, when
all hope seems lost, the vampire draws away the last vestiges of
the companion’s life and infuses them with its own energies. The
process is both traumatic and passionate, for this mingling of es-
sences is far more intimate than any purely physical act of love.

When the bonding is completed, both the vampire and its vic-
tim are exhausted and all but helpless for upwards of an hour. At
the end of that time, the victim has become a vampire.

While the newly created companion is as much a slave of its
master as any vampire spawned from an act of violence, there is
something special about it. The companion shares a special meta-
physical link with its master. Both can experience the other's
senses at certain times of day or under the influence of certain
charms and enchantments. In many cases, this bond is fleeting
and exists only briefly, at dawn and dusk for example, while for
others it is a continuous exchange that cannot be broken without
the death of one or the other. In many cases, a vampire’s compan-
ion also has the ability to command its master's slaves, so long as
no action is ordered that would place them in direct confronta-
tion with their creator.

From the point of their bonding on, the two vampires are ut-
terly loyal to each other. While the master might willingly sacri-
fice its other minions as pawns, it will protect its companion as if
it were a king or queen. Likewise, the companion will take no
action against its master and will do all that it can to protect him
or her from harm. Both will even give up their own lives to save
that of their companion, In fact, the bond between the two is so
intense that if the master is slain, its companion retains the ability
to command its slaves as if he or she were the vampire that had
created them.

 

 

 

 

 

 
Vampire, Dwarf

utterly destroy the vampire when it reaches zero hit points. Holy
symbols will keep the creature at bay, although they will do no
damage to it (even if pressed against the vampire’s flesh).

Like all other vampires, these creatures are immune to all man-
ner of mind-affecting spells. These include, but are not limited to,
sleep, charm, and hold. As undead things, they are immune to
any type of poisons or toxins and cannot be suffocated or
drowned. Spells that do damage with cold or electricity do only
half damage to the monster, but those employing fire have their
normal effect. Unlike most other vampires, dwarven vampires
are not harmed by sunlight. They are unable to regenerate when
in full sunlight, however, and will go to great lengths to avoid en-
tering it, for they find it painfully bright.

Dwarven vampires cannot assume the forms of wolves or bats
as some other vampires can, but are able to summon any form of
burrowing or subterranean creature to their aid. When they opt
to do this, 10-100 (10d10) hit dice worth of such animals will ar-
rive within 2-12 rounds. The exact type of animals called depends
on the area in which the vampire is encountered, but each vam-
pire has its favorite type of animal.

Vampire dwarves have the ability to stonewalk at will. With
this power, they are able to enter and walk through any thickness
of stone or earth as if it were nothing more than air. It is not un-
known for a vampire dwarf to lurk just beneath the surface of the
earth and then spring up to attack those walking above it. The
vampire can extend the magical aura of this power to allow it to
bring any object it can carry with it when it stonewalks. Thus, a
dwarven vampire could grab a victim and then employ its stone-
walking power to sink straight into the earth and escape anyone
in pursuit. A dwarven vampire hit with a dispel magic spell is un-
able to stonewalk for 2d4 rounds or until they are reduced to zero
hit points and forced into a stonewalking state. If a character
manages to attack the dwarven vampire while it is employing this
power, there is no change to the creature's natural defenses or vul-
nerabilities.

Dwarven vampires cannot cross a line of powdered metal (even
if they are stonewalking). They can take action to indirectly
break the line, summoning rats to scamper through it, for exam-
ple, but the dwarven vampire may never directly affect it. If there
is even the slightest break in the line, however, the vampire can
move past it with ease.

Dwarven vampires are unable to enter a structure that is not
made in some part of stone or earth. Thus, a yeoman’s home in
the woods built wholly of logs would offer complete protection
from the intrusions of a dwarven vampire while a mighty stone
castle could be entered with ease.

Dwarven vampires can be turned as if they were normal vam-
pires. As the years pass, however, and their contact with the neg-
ative material plane strengthens and, when combined with their
own natural resistance to all manner of magics, they become
harder and harder to turn away. The most powerful and ancient
of these creatures are reported to be almost impossible to drive
away, no matter how strong the faith of the turning priest may be.

Killing a vampire dwarf is a difficult proposition at best. The
most sure way of ending the creature's dark unlife is to impale it
through the heart on a natural stalactite or stalagmite. The body
of the vampire can either be forced onto the stone or the stone
driven through the body of the creature. Once the vampire has
been killed in this way, however, it can be revived simply by re-
moving the impaling object. In order to assure that the creature
remains dead, its heart must be cut out, soaked in oil for 3 days,
and then set alight. When the last flames of the fire have faded
away, so too has the essence of the vampire.

 

Habitat/Society: Dwarven vampires seek out the deepest and
darkest of subterranean lairs. They shun all contact with their
kind, perhaps out of disgust or embarrassment over what has be-
come of them. The only time they will seek out other dwarves is
when they wish to create a vampire companion or are in need of
slaves for some evil deed.

Dwarven vampires are the most introverted of all the racial
vampire types. They tend to keep to themselves and do not seek
to amass power as do human vampires. This does not, however,
mean that they will become utterly isolated, however, for they
are drawn to feed on the essences of the living.

Age HD Save To Hit Fear Turn
0-99 10+3 +5 +2 -2 Vampire
100-199 11+3 +5 <2 2 Vampire
200-299 12+3 +5 +3 -3 Ghost
300-399 13 +2 +6 +3 -4 Ghost
400-499 14+1 +6 ~s -5 Lich

500 + 15 +7 +4 -5 Special

HD indicates the number of Hit Dice that the vampire has at a
given age.

Save shows the bonus to the vampires saving throws versus
wands, rods, staffs, and spells.

To Hit indicates the magical plus that must be associated with a
weapon before it can harm the vampire.

Fear indicates the penalty that is applied to the fear check of
those targets being attacked by the vampire’s gaze attack.

Turn indicates the row on the Turning Undead table that is con-
sulted for attempts to drive away these monsters.

Ecology: The dwarven vampire is a thing of darkness and evil
that has no place in the natural world. It moves about, spreading
death and suffering, in an attempt to ease the misery it feels over
having been doomed to an eternal life that it detests.

Those dwarves that fall prey to the undead will often become
themselves undead. Three days after any character dies from the
vampire's vitality draining, they will rise again if certain condi-
tions are met. First, and most importantly, the victim must have
been a dwarf. Vampire dwarves who kill elves or humans will not
create new vampires, for only their own kind can be brought
back to unlife by them. Further, the body must be intact. Second,
the body must be placed in a stone coffin or sarcophagus and then
entombed in some subterranean place. A typical burial service
will meet this requirement, while placement in a crypt on the sur-
face will not. Finally, the dwarven vampire must visit the body of
its victim on the third night after burial and sprinkle the body
with powdered metals. As soon as this is done, the new vampire is
born. As with all vampires, it is now a slave to its creator.

Because they realize the torment that transformation into a
vampire causes to dwarves, the vampire dwarf is reluctant to cre-
ate others of its kind. Thus, it does this only when it feels that it
need minions to help it carry out its acts of evil.

In many cases, the vampire will kill its minions after they have
served it for a few months, freeing them from the suffering that it
must endure. Such kindness and compassion seems out of place
for these creatures, but many scholars believe that they still retain
the last vestiges of their love for other dwarves and cannot bear to
spread their suffering to others of their proud race. In most cases,
the free-willed dwarven vampires of Ravenloft were created by
masters who were slain before they could destroy their minions,
leaving their creations to suffer in their place.

 

 

 

 

 
 

Vampire, Elf

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Non-arctic forest
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Special
INTELLIGENCE: Genius (17-18)
TREASURE: F

ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 2

MOVEMENT: 15

HIT DICE: 7+3

THACO: i3

NO, OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4 or by weapon (+ Str bonus)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: M (5-6’ tall)
MORALE: Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: 3,000 (+1,000 per 100 years of age)

The elvish vampire is a tragic creature indeed, for when someone
from a race that so loves life and goodness turns to evil and death,
the world has lost much. The evil that lurks within the elven vam-
pire is so overwhelming that it forces the creature to transform
the vital, living forests around him into places of death and decay.

Unlike all other types of vampire, the elvish variety cannot
move among others of its kind freely. The evil that has twisted the
creature's spirit has also wrought havoc on its fair features. Thus,
elvish vampires appear as twisted and scarred mockeries of this
beautiful and graceful race. Because of this, they often dress in
dark robes and wear garments designed to hide their appearance
from the world.

Elven vampires tend to speak their own language and a handful
of others—whatever they had learned in life. It is rumored (and
there is much evidence to support this) that they can converse
with the animals of the forest and learn from them all that is oc-
curring in their realms.

Combat: When they engage in melee combat, elvish vampires are
very dangerous opponents. While they do not have the same
physical power that vampires of other types might possess, their
Strength score of 18/01 is still enough to merit a +1 on all attack
rolls and a +3 on all damage rolls, They will often employ weap-
ons in combat, favoring swords and daggers above all other
weapons.

Elvish vampires retain the knowledge they had in life, includ-
ing their racial, class, and magical abilities. Thus, all elvish vam-
pires have an extra +1 bonus on attack rolls made with long
swords or bows, can move silently when not in metal armor, and
see fully 60 feet with keen infravision. Further, they remain able
to detect secret and concealed doors with great skill and often em-
ploy this power to gain entrance into places where their prey
might be hiding.

Elvish vampires are also master archers, and will employ all
manner of bows in combat. Their undead status removes from
them the disrupting effects of breathing, muscle fatigue, and heart
beats and allows the vampire a +4 bonus on all missile fire attack
rolls. The arrows these foul creatures employ are almost always
carved from the bones of living, intelligent creatures and may
(20% chance) be magical in some way.

Elvish vampires feed by drawing the vital, creative energies out
of their prey. Any successful unarmed melee attack allows the

 

 

 

vampire to drain 2 Charisma points from its victim. The resulting
lack of vibrancy and personal leadership ability is also accompa-
nied by a wicked-looking scar that will never leave the body of
the victim. A victim of several blows from such a creature may
well become so horribly scarred as to be unrecognizable to all but
his closest friends. Any elf or half-elf who dies from the vampire’s
essence draining attack will become a vampire as described in
Ecology.

Those who see the scared and twisted face of an elvish vampire
must save vs. paralysis or be unable to move until 1d4 rounds af-
ter they have lost sight of the vampire. If the saving throw at-
tempt results in a natural die rol] of “1,” the character is instantly
stricken dead. Those who die in this way will not become vam-
pires and may be resurrected normally.

Elven vampires can be struck only by +1 or better magical
weapons. All lesser arms will not bite into the creature, but will
pass through it as though the monster were not there. Even those
weapons that harm the vampire may not be strong enough to de-
stroy it, for the creature regenerates 2 hit points per combat
round.

All manner of sleep, charm, hold, or similar magical spells will
not affect the vampire. Likewise, the creature cannot be harmed
by poisons, toxins, or diseases for it is no longer a living thing.
Magical spells that inflict damage with fire or cold will do only
half damage to the vampire, but those employing lightning or
electricity will do full damage.

A vampire driven to zero hit points is not destroyed, but is
forced to flee the combat at once by using its transport via plants
ability (see below) to enter a nearby plant and escape its enemies.
If the vampire cannot do this within 2 combat rounds, its body
will crumble into dust and will be forever destroyed.

At will, the elvish vampire can make use of a power almost
identical to the transport via plants spell. With this power, the
vampire may simply walk into any man-sized or larger plant and
walk out of another plant (of the same type) anywhere else in the
world. In Ravenloft, it cannot use this power to cross domain
Vampire, Elf

   

   

  

Paley ea
<j) rend the eet >

Sirk. pea aie Mt rity 2

 

 

 

 

   

 

borders or leave the demiplane itself. As soon as the vampire has
used this power, both of the plants involved are killed. Within a
week, they will lose all of their leaves and begin to dry out.
Within a month, they will be fragile and unsafe to climb, finally
collapsing or crumbling under their own weight. Unlike the trans-
port via plants spell, the vampire’s ability has no chance of error.
Otherwise, the spell works just as described in the Player's Hand-
book.

An elvish vampire may, at will, assume the form of a wild ea-
gle. In this guise, it retains all of its natural vampiric powers, im-
munities, and vulnerabilities, but has the characteristics listed for
such creatures in the Monstrous Compendium. Once per week it
may take on the form of a giant eagle, again conforming to the
statistics presented in the Monstrous Compendium.

Elven vampires can command the creatures of the forest to
come to their aid when they are in peril. As a rule, they will call
upon wolves (3d6), birds of prey (5d6), or small mammals like
badgers, porcupines, or the like (6d6). In all cases, these animals
arrive within 1d6 turns and will remain with the vampire until
dismissed.

Elvish vampires have a number of natural abilities that make
them very dangerous in their natural environment. At will, they
can pass without trace or become invisible to animals. They sel-
dom use the latter power, however, for they can command any
creature of the forest to obey them, as described above. Thrice
per day they may employ the following spell-like abilities: entan-
gle, warp wood, snare, spike growth, and anti-animal shell. Once
per day they may create a wall of thorns, change sticks to snakes,
or manifest a giant insect.

Sunlight does not harm the elvish vampire. In fact, they live
their unlives by day and shun the night. As soon as the sun falls
behind the horizon, the elvish vampire must be in his coffin. Each
round that the monster lingers outside after sunset inflicts 1d4
points of damage, ultimately killing the creature. An elven vam-
pire that dies in this manner is forever dead.

The cruelest card that fate has dealt the elvish vampire is that of
its black thumb. Any plant that the creature touches withers and
dies. In small plants, like flowers, this effect is instantaneous. In
larger plants, like shrubs or hedges, it takes about a day for the
plant's death to become obvious. The largest of plants, trees and
such, will take over a week to die, during which time the elf feels
the agony they are experiencing. This curse does not travel
through clothing, so elvish vampires wearing boots do not leavea
trail of dead footprints in the grass they walk through. They can
also handle flowers if they wear gloves. The intimate relationship
that the elf had with living things when he was alive, however,
has been shattered and this is a psychological blow that drives
many elvish vampires over the brink of madness when they are
first created.

Although the powers of the elvish vampire are many and var-
ied, they are not without weaknesses. Like all vampires, they can
be turned by priests or paladins with the courage to do so. In fact,
the elven vampire’s link to the negative material plane is not as
strong as those of other vampires, causing it to be turned as if it
were a spectre instead of a vampire.

Elvish vampires can travel beneath the earth's surface only at
great physical risk to themselves. For each round spent in such a
setting, the creature must suffer 1d4 points of damage (as if it
were moving about after nightfall). Further, the creature cannot
regenerate or employ any of its magical abilities when under-
ground. If the vampire dies or is reduced to zero hit points while
underground, it is destroyed.

An elven vampire is unaffected by holy water, but can be
burned by contact with sap from any deciduous tree. If the sap is
fresh (drawn within the last 6 hours) it may be smeared on the
vampire with a successful attack roll. As soon as it hits the crea-
ture’s skin, it causes the vampire extreme pain and inflicts 2d4

Yv

points of damage.

Elven vampires cannot be held at bay by mirrors, holy sym-
bols, or garlic, but cannot cross an a line of flower petals. The
petals must be fairly fresh—plucked from their plants within the
last 24 hours—and the line must be unbroken in order for this de-
fense to be effective. The vampire cannot take direct action to
break the line of petals, but can command some animal or other
servant to break the line for him.

Destroying an elvish vampire is as difficult as destroying any
other vampire, for they are crafty and deadly foes. The surest
way to accomplish this feat, however, is to impale the creature
with a charcoal stake. In order to be effective, the stake must be
driven through the creature's heart with a single blow from a
wooden mallet. If the vampire is incapacitated in some way, this
does not normally present a problem, but in combat it is almost
impossible to accomplish.

While a charcoal stake through the heart will kill the creature,
it sill rise again as soon as the stake is removed unless the vam-
pire’s head is cut off and burned in a fire made of flowers and
flowering shrubs. In order to completely destroy the skull and
brain, which is vital to the destruction of the vampire, the fire
must burn for no less than 24 hours.

Habitat/Society: Elvish vampires despise the living world that
they have left behind. The sight of thriving woods and blooming
flowers that once thrilled them has now been replaced by a hatred
of all that is vital and fair. The areas they inhabit reflect this, for
they will always be groves or forests with diseased trees, dying
plants, and infertile soil. No attempt to raise crops or cultivate the
land near an elven vampire’s lair will be tolerated by the creature.

As time goes by, elvish vampires can become even more power-
ful than they are initially. The following table list the modifica-
tions associated with the aging of the monster.

Age HD To Hit Bows Resistance
0-99 7*3 +1 +4 0%
100-199 8+2 t1 +4 5%
200-299 9+1 +1 +5 5%
300-399 10 +2 +5 10%
400-499 11 2 +6 15%

500 + 12 +3 +6 25%

HD is the number of Hit Dice that a vampire has at any given

e.

To Hit indicates the magical plus that must be associated with a
weapon in order for it to harm the vampire.

Bows lists the attack roll bonus that the creature gains when it
is employing any form of non-crossbow.

Resistance lists the magic resistance that the vampire acquires
as time goes by.

Ecology: Like all undead, the elven vampire is not a part of the
living world. It has no place in the land of the living and, knowing
this, seeks to corrupt or destroy all that it encounters. Because of
this, even the dreaded Drow fear these creatures greatly.

Any elf or half-elf who falls to the essence draining attack of an
elven vampire will rise again as an elven vampire so long as the
body is intact after three days. If the body has been destroyed or
mutilated, the transformation is averted, and the dead character
may rest in peace. However, any attempt to revive the slain char-
acter (with a resurrection spell, for example) has a flat 50%
chance of transforming the character into a vampire once the
spell is cast.

 

 

 

 

 
Vampire, Gnome

    
  
 

ie TER fh Mie se
“ Sori Na Le

 
   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any subterranean
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Special
INTELLIGENCE: Genius (17-18)
TREASURE: F
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 0
MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 6+3

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: S (3-4’ tall)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 3,000 (+1,000 per 100 years of age)

 

While the race of gnomes is little understood by many surface
dwellers, the deadly breed of vampire that these creatures spawn
are even more alien. Moving about far beneath the world’s sur-
face, they are seldom encountered by humans or other demi-
basa When they are found, however, they are terrible foes
indeed.

Gnomish vampires are shorter and slighter of build than
dwarvish vampires. Unlike other undead, however, the passage
of time is visible in the features of a gnomish vampire. Thus, their
features are grooved and worn, showing the full burden of the
years that have passed them by.

Gnomish vampires are still able to understand the languages
they spoke in life, but are unable to speak themselves. There is no
known reason for this curse of silence, save that it robs them of
the ability to joke and sing that they so loved in life. Because of
this, most communications with gnomish vampires require writ-
ten messages.

Combat: Physical combat with any form of vampire is dangerous
indeed. When the opponent is a gnomish vampire, however, the
penalty for defeat may be a horrible life as a helpless cripple.

The gnomish vampire gains no bonus for strength in combat,
for its ties to the negative material plane have not infused it with
great physical power. Thus, an unarmed blow from the creature
will inflict but 1d4 points of damage. Because their hand-to-hand
attack is so ineffective, they will often employ flails or other
weapons in combat.

While the hand-to-hand blows of gnomish vampires are weak,
however, they are not without a powerful debilitating affect.
Those struck by such attacks will begin to feel the painful arthritic
attack of the creature instantly, for each successful attack drains 2
points of Dexterity from the victim. The result is a painful stiff-
ness in the joints and muscles that can, if the victim suffers several
attacks, be crippling or even fatal. Those reduced to a Dexterity
score of 0 will be slain as the creeping paralysis spreads through
their lungs and heart, making it impossible for them to survive.
Gnomes who die in this fashion may themselves become undead
(see Ecology) if steps are not taken to prevent this foul transfor-
mation.

The gnomish vampire is able to add a +1 bonus to its attack
rolls against creatures such as kobolds or goblins. Similarly, crea-
tures like ogres, trolls, and bugbears are unable to effectively bat-

 

 

 

 

 

tle such an agile creature, suffering a -4 on their attack rolls.

The natural 60’ infravision of living gnomes still exists in their
vampiric form, but is augmented by their dark nature. Like dwar-
ven vampires, they are able to see in even the dimmest of lighting
as if it were full daylight.

Once per turn, the gnomish vampire may twist its features into
a horrible smile. Those who look upon the gnome at this time
must save versus spells or begin to laugh. The effects of this grin
are the same as those of a Tasha’s uncontrollable hideous laughter
spell, save that the duration doubled and the character suffers 1d4
points of damage per round that they are laughing. As the vam-
pire ages, this power becomes even more horrible, inflicting
greater damage and becoming harder to save against.

Gnomish vampires can be hit only by metal weapons, and then
only by those that are magical and have a +1 or better enchant-
ment. Non-metal magical weapons are utterly useless against the
creature. Gnomes also have the traditional vampiric immunity to
such spells as charm, sleep, or hold and cannot be harmed by poi-
sons or disease. They are immune to the effects of all spells from
the illusion/phantasm school and take only half damage from
magical attacks that depend on lightning, cold, or fire.

Gnomish vampires that are driven to zero hit points by spells
or weapons are not destroyed. Rather, they are driven into their
spectral form (see below) and forced to flee from combat. While
in this form they must fly as quickly as possible to the cavern that
holds their sarcophagus. If they are unable to reach their final
resting place within 12 rounds, they will break up and be utterly
destroyed.

Gnomish vampires have the ability to assume a spectral form.
In this guise, they appear to be nothing more than sphere of
light—much like a will o'wisp. While in this glowing shape, the
creature can pass through solid stone walls or similar barricades.
They cannot, however, pass through any living or once living
material in this shape, so a wooden wall is impassible to them.

Gnomish vampires are unable to change their shapes as some
other undead creatures can. Still, they are not unable to disguise
Vampire, Gnome

themselves when the need arises, for they can cast a change self
spell at will and may maintain the deception provided by this
spell for an unlimited period of time.

When they wish to, gnomish vampires are able to command
any animal they encounter. They cannot, however, summon such
creatures to them and must rely on those that chance brings to
them. Once they have commanded a specific creature to do their
bidding, it will remain with them for 2d4 days before moving on.

Gnomish vampires can employ an ability similar to that of the
spider climb spell. This power, however, only permits them to
scale surfaces built of stone or earth and they are unable to cling
to those surfaces made of wood or other substances. This power
can be invoked at will.

The creature retains the special abilities that it had in life, just
as all other types of vampires do. Thus, they are able to employ
all of their class and magical abilities long after they have become
undead.

Like dwarven vampires, these creatures are unusually resistant
to magic. Any saving throw they are required to make versus
spells, rods, wands, or staves is made at a +5 bonus. As the crea-
ture ages, it will become even more resistant to magic as described
in Habitat/Society below. Because of this, gnomish vampires are
greatly hindered when they attempt to employ magical devices.
Whenever they seek to use such items, there is a 35% chance that
the device will malfunction. This does not apply to weapons, ar-
mors, shields, or those items that duplicate the effects of illusion-
ist spells. If the creature was a thief in life, it can also employ
those devices used by such characters without penalty.

The natural familiarity of these creatures with the underground
environment gives them many special abilities in life, and all of
these are manifested in the creature after death. Thus, the gnome
can determine approximate directions when underground 3 times
in 6, sense their approximate depth underground 4 times in 6, de-
tect slopes or grades 5 times in 6, and detect unsafe walls or floors
7 times in 10.

Gnomish vampires can be held at bay in several ways. They
cannot turn away from any jewel (see Gems in the Dungeon Mas-
ter's Guide) that is presented to them for 2d4 rounds. If they are
attacked during that time, they are freed of this enchantment and
can act normally. Similarly, they can be turned aside by priests or
paladins who present a holy symbol strongly to them. As they
grow older, though, it becomes harder and harder to turn them in
this fashion.

Gnomish vampires can be burned by holy water or contact
with holy symbols, but suffer only 1d4 points of damage per vial
splashed upon them or successful attack roll. They cannot ap-
proach someone who displays a holy symbol and has strong con-
victions about the validity of their beliefs, but neither are they
driven away from such persons.

The surest way to destroy a gnomish vampire is to impale it on
a spike made of purest silver and enchanted with a bless spell. As
soon as the spike is driven into the body of the creature, its mate-
rial form is destroyed and it will collapse dead. While the creature
is truly lifeless at this point, it can be revived simply by removing
the spike. In order to assure that they creature remains dead a
number of things must be done. First, the hands must be cut from
the corpse and boiled in a natural volcanic hot spring for 24
hours. Second, the body must be placed in a wooden casket that
will be sealed at the end of the destruction process. Lastly, when
the body lies in the coffin, its eyes must be removed and replaced
with precious gems. Stones of higher quality may be used, but
those of lesser value will allow the creature to be revived. Finally,
the lid of the casket is hammered into place and the nightmare is
ended.

Daylight is devastating to these creatures, destroying them ut-
terly and instantly when it falls upon them. Magical spells that
duplicate sunlight, even those that normally harm undead, do not

 

Oya Ln Dlr cra
OFC Lhe BC
Wind

Sin

      
  
   

   

 

 

        

 
 

affect these creatures however, for their natural magical resist-
ance protects them from such things.

Habitat/Society: The gnomish vampire lives in the deepest of ca-
verns, hiding like a hermit from all surface dwellers. Where they
were charismatic and mischievous in life, now they are dour and
reclusive. They only seek out others when they need to feed and
will gladly prey on the energies of any human, demihuman, or
humanoid they encounter.

As gnomish vampires age, they become more dangerous and
more powerful. Very old vampires are, of course, among the
most deadly beings found in Ravenloft or any other realm.

Age HD Laughter To Hit Saves Turn
0-99 6+3 -0/1d4 +1 +5 Vampire
100-199 7+3 -1/1d6 +1 +5 Vampire
200-299 8+3 -2/1d8 +1 +6 Ghost
300-399 9+3 -3/1d8 +2 +6 Ghost
400-499 10+2 -4/1d10 +2 +7 Lich
500 + AL +2 -5/1d10 +3 +8 Special

HD indicates the number of Hit Dice that the creature has at
any given age.

Laughter lists the saving throw modifiers and the damage in-
flicted by its deadly grin.

To Hit is the minimum magical plus that must be associated
with a metal weapon. Non-metal weapons cannot harm the vam-
pire regardless of its age.

Saves indicates the modifier to the creature's saving throws ver-
sus spells, rods, staffs, or wands.

Turn shows the row on the Turning Undead table that is con-
sulted when a priest or paladin attempts to drive away the crea-
ture with a holy symbol.

Ecology: The gnomish vampire sustains itself by drawing the
youthful vigor from the bodies of those it touches. While this re-
sembles the aging attack of a ghost, it is not truly the same, for the
person is not actually aged, their body is just robbed of its youth-
ful vitality. While the difference is fine, it is important; many be-
lieve that the vampire's attack is far worse than that of the ghost.

Gnomish vampires seldom create others of their kind. When
they opt to do so, however, the process is not without risk. The
vampire must first slay a victim with its debilitating touch and
then move the body to the sarcophagus in which the vampire it-
self sleeps. For the next three days, the body must lie in the coffin
while the vampire rests atop it, allowing its essences to seep slow-
ly into the evolving vampire. At the end of this time, the slain
gnome rises as a fully functioning vampire, completely under the
contro! of its creator. While the gnome vampire rests atop its cof-
fin, it is unable to regenerate any lost hit points or employ any of
its spell-like abilities. Thus, the creature is far more vulnerable to
attack at this time than it normally might be. In addition, it can-
not interrupt the creation process once it has begun or both the
would-be vampire and its creator will die.

 

 

 

 

 

 
Vampire, Halfling

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate woodlands
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night
DIET: Special
INTELLIGENCE: High (13-14)
TREASURE: F
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 3
MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 6+3
THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK:  1d4
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: S (4-5' tall)
MORALE: Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 3,000

Few races enjoy life and the basic comforts of a quiet, peaceful
existence more than the halflings. Thus, when one of these fine
creatures is driven into a life of evil by the preying of some sinis-
ter vampire, the world suffers a great loss.

The halfling vampire has the same physical characteristics that
living halflings do: being slightly plump, standing only about
four feet high, and being marked by a florid complexion and tufts
of hair on the backs of their hands and tops of their feet. They
tend to dress in dark clothes, however, shunning the happy and
colorful garb of their living kin.

The halfling vampire is most often familiar with half a dozen
or so languages (including their native tongue). Nearly all of
them spoke common in life (and thus retain that knowledge in
death) as well as the elvish, dwarvish, and gnomish languages.

Combat: The strength of a halfling vampire is not exceptional as
it is for most other vampire races. Thus, they gain no additional
bonus to their melee attack or damage rolls. They do employ me-
lee weapons frequently, favoring the short sword, dagger, and
similar small weapons. Should the halfling vampire elect to strike
without benefit of physical arms, it inflicts but 1d4 points of dam-
age. While this is not greatly threatening in itself, the vampire's
strong connection with the negative material plane allows him to
drain a portion of the victim's life energy with each successful at-
tack. Thus, any character hit by the vampire suffers the required
damage and instantly loses 1 point of Strength and 1 point of
Constitution. The resulting loss in hit points, combat ability, and
so forth is calculated immediately. Those halflings who die from
this life draining attack will become vampires themselves, as de-
scribed in the Habitat/Society below.

The halfling vampire is able to radiate an aura that affects all
persons within 20 yards. Any creature that comes within this dis-
tance while the vampire is radiating its aura must save vs. spells
or become fatigued Those who make their save are unaffected
and will remain so for the duration of the encounter. If they meet
the vampire again, however, a new save will be required to resist
this enchantment. Those who fail their saving throw will be over-
come with a feeling of lassitude and torpor. This state lasts for 1d6
rounds, during which time they attack with a -4 penalty, inflict
half damage with all weapons, and are unable to summon the
mental stamina required to cast spells or make proficiency
checks. As the vampire ages, the duration of its terrible lethargy

 

 

aura becomes greater, although its effects remain largely the
same.

The natural resistance to magic of all halflings, coupled with
the increased immunity to spells of the undead, makes attacking
the halfling vampire very difficult. Any weapon of less than +2
enchantment cannot harm the creature, passing harmlessly
through the vampire. As the vampire ages, it becomes harder and
harder to strike.

Halfling vampires retain all natural abilities of halflings in their
undead state. Thus, they have an improved saving throw against
all magical spells, rods, staffs, or wands employed against them.
This begins at +5, but improves with the passing of time until the
vampire is almost impossible to destroy with such attacks. Simi-
larly, they retain their natural affinity for thrown weapons, gain-
ing a +1 on all attack rolls made with them. Halfling vampires
are still able to move silently (as an elf) in their afterlife, allowing
them to sneak up on opponents with ease. These undead can al-
ways employ the backstabbing ability of a 1st level thief; vam-
pires who were thieves in life may have better backstabbing
abilities.

All halfling vampires have infravision out to 60 feet, regardless
of their racial stock or infravision ability in life. Further, they all
have the ability (75% chance) to tell whether a passage has any
natural grade or slope to it , no matter how minor the slope might
be. They also have a 50% chance of determining directions
(north, south, etc.) when underground.

The vampire is immune to all manner of sleep, charm, hold, or
other mind-affecting spells. Further, it is immune to all manner of
poisons, toxins, or diseases and has no need to breathe. Spells
based on lightning or fire inflict only half damage to the halfling
vampire, while those based on cold have their full effect.

If the vampire is reduced to zero hit points, either by magical
spells or physical attack, but is not properly destroyed (as dic-
tated below), it is not slain. Rather, it is forced to assume its
smoking form and flee from the combat. If it is unable to return to
its coffin within 12 rounds of this forced transformation, its
Vampire, Halfling

smoking form breaks up and it is forever destroyed.

At will, the halfling vampire can transform itself into any man-
ner of small woodland mammal. While in this form, the vampire
takes on all of that creature's abilities and senses, but retains its
own immunity to spells or non-magical weapons, intelligence,
and similar powers. The most commonly employed forms are
those of badgers, beavers, skunks, and similar animals.

Just as halfling vampires can assume the shape of woodland
mammals, so too can they command them. Within 2d6 rounds af-
ter the vampire issues its mental summons, 10-60 Hit Dice worth
of such creatures will arrive to do its bidding. These animals will
remain throughout the night on which they were summoned, re-
turning to their homes with the coming of the dawn.

In addition to its natural animal guises, the vampire can trans-
form itself into a smoking form at will. In this state, it appears as a
drifting cloud of smoke such as might be made by a small camp-
fire or burning pipe. It radiates a familiar and pleasing odor, one
that will remind those within 10 yards of pipeweed and a com-
fortable inn. In this state, the vampire is immune to all damage
from melee attacks and suffers no injury from magical spells.
Even the smallest opening, a key hole or cracked pane of glass, for
example, will allow a halfling vampire in this shape to pass
through.

Halfling vampires have the ability to create food and drink up
to 3 times per day. When they invoke this power, the food they
create is always of the highest quality and certain to please even
the most discriminating palate. In addition, they can cast a purify
food and drink or putrefy food and drink at will, often using the
former powers to lure others into a sense of security and safety
that makes the victims more vulnerable to attack.

Despite its great power, the halfling vampire is not without
weaknesses of its own. It cannot, for example, stand the odor of a
smoking pipe, for such things remind it of the physical pleasures
that it has left behind. While the aroma of burning pipeweed will
not drive the vampire away, it does prevent the creature from
coming within 20 yards of the smoker until the offending device is
removed. Similarly, the vampire cannot enter any room where a
fire is burning in the hearth. Again, the association with the half-
ling’s past life is too strong for the creature to bear, and it will turn
away from such memories. In both cases, the vampire can take no
action to directly counter the offending items. The vampire may,
however, instruct one of its minions to enter the room and extin-
guish the pipe or smother the fire, allowing the undead creature
can come freely into the chamber.

Halfling vampires can be held at bay by anyone who presents a
lawful good holy symbol to them strongly and with conviction.
As with the pipe, this does not drive them away, but does keep
them from approaching a character so equipped. Holy water or
lawful good holy symbols that touch the vampire’s flesh will in-
flict the same damage that they do to human vampires (1d6+1
points), burning the creature's flesh. Halfling vampires can be
turned normally.

Halfling vampires regenerate damage very quickly. Each com-
bat round they regain 2 hit points of damage. If they are standing
in the light of the moon, this is increased to 3 points of damage. If
the moon is a full moon, this is further improved to 4 points of
damage.

Falling rain is deadly to the halfling vampire, for it is nature's
way of driving away taints from the atmosphere and revitalizing
all living creatures. Damage is based on the severity of the
weather and the time of exposure. A vampire destroyed by rain-
fall is forever dead.

Severity of Rain Damage per Round
Light 1d6

Heavy 1d8

Torrential 1d10

     

 

Qian liiee>

Snow does not harm the vampire as rain does, but they are
loathe to move into a cold climate and, thus, seldom encounter it.

Just as halfling vampires can be held off by the presence of a
burning hearth, so too can they be destroyed by it. The surest
way to destroy a vampire of this type is to impale him with a piece
of wood that burns with a hearth’s fire. The wood must be ignited
directly from the hearth itself and not from a fire transferred to it
via some third item. This “weapon” must be employed within 12
rounds to be effective. Not all of the wood need be ablaze, but the
part driven into the vampire must be burning for the attack to
have its desired effect.

Although the vampire is instantly slain by this attack, the crea-
ture can be revived simply by removing the wooden stake from
its body. In order to complete the destruction of the being, the
creature's hands and feet must be cut off and cast into a hearth
fire. If the fire is maintained for three hours, the rest of the vam-
pire’s body will smolder away into smoke and dissipate, never to
rise again.

Sunlight is very dangerous to halfling vampire, as it is to most
such creatures, and can destroy them. Each round that a halfling
vampire is exposed to the direct rays of the sun, it suffers 3d6
points of damage and is filled with such pain that it can neither at-
tack nor defend itself. Further, it cannot transform into any of its
other shapes until it removes itself from the direct light of the sun.
Magical spells that imitate the light of the sun, such as continual
light, will not harm the creature, but sources like a sunblade will

have the sunlight affect.

Habitat/Society: Halfling vampires shun the comforts of physical
life that were so dear to them before their transformations. They
live in dark and dreary places that do not serve to remind them of
the happiness they have left behind. Their loss of happiness and
contentment has led them to despise all those who are able to curl
up before a crackling fire with a good story and a mug of ale,
driving them to do what they can to shatter the complacent lives
of other halfling whenever they can.

As with other demihuman vampires, halfling vampires become
more powerful with age, as represented by the table below.

Age HD Save To Hit Aura
0-99 6+3 +5 +2 -0
100-199 7+3 +5 +Z -1
200-299 8+2 +6 +2 -2
300-399 9+2 +6 +3 3
400-499 10+1 +7 +3 -4
500 + 11+1 +8 +3 -5

HD indicates the creature's Hit Dice as it ages.

Save shows the bonus to the creature's saves when attacked
with spells, rods, staves, or wands.

To Hit indicates the magical bonus that must be associated with
the weapon to enable it to affect the vampire.

Aura is the penalty to applied to the saving throws of those
caught in the vampire’s fatigue aura.

Ecology: The halfling vampire has no place in the natural world,
a fact demonstrated by its aversion to rain and the earthly purity
it represents.

The vampire can make more of its kind only by slaying other
halflings with its energy-sapping attack. In order to create a new
vampire, the halfling need do nothing more than keep the body of
its victim intact for 7 days after death and a new vampire will be
created.

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

Vampire, Kender

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Sithicus
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night
DIET: Special
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil
NO. APPEARING: 1
ARMOR CLASS: 2
MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 4+3
THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: S (3-4'tall)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 4,000

From the dark land of Sithicus comes word of a breed of vampire
only recently released on the demiplane of Ravenloft: the kender
vampire. While not truly the equal of the other species of vam-
pire, these monsters are no less evil.

Kender vampires retain the same general physical properties
that they did in life. Thus, they stand somewhat under four feet in
height and are very slightly built. Their eyes and ears give them
an impish, elven look, and their slender bodies are finely mus-
cled, like those of gymnasts. Upon closer examination, however,
the foul corruption of the undead is obvious. The skin is pale and
withered, stretched tight across the bones in a manner similar to
that found on mummified corpses. The teeth are long and sharp,
giving the face a feral look that cannot be easily forgotten. The
fingers have been reduced to little more than bones with a thin
covering of flesh, and their nails have stretched into claws.

Kender vampire are able to speak only in hissing whispers.
Since it is clearly quite painful for them to talk, however, they sel-
dom do so. Their knowledge of languages seems unchanged from
what it was in life, however, so they often understand a small
number of other tongues.

Combat: The kender vampire moves slowly and stiffly when it at-
tacks. Thus, the great agility and dexterity that served it so well in
life have been lost in its transition to darkness. Because of this,
kender vampires always act last in any combat round and never
surprise their opponents, The loss of agility is somewhat compen-
sated for by an increased physical strength and the growth of dan-
gerous claws. Thus, they are able to inflict 1d6 points of damage
in any hand-to-hand attack.

Kender vampires often use the hoopak, a combination staff-
sling and bo staff. When employed as a sling, it enables the crea-
ture to hurl stones that inflict 1d4 +1 points of damage to small or
man-sized opponents and 1d6 +1 points to larger foes. If used as a
bo staff, it causes 1d4 points of damage to man-sized or smaller
foes and 1d6 points of damage to larger ones.

Anyone struck by the claws of the kender vampire feels far
more than the pain of a physical wound. Their attacks reach be-
yond the mortal body of their victim and strike directly into his
spirit. The shock and pain caused by this attack is great, requiring
the victim to make a saving throw vs. paralysis or be unable to
act on the next combat round. Whether or not they make their
saving throw, they suffer a loss of 1 point each from their Intelli-

 

 

 

gence and Wisdom scores. Those kender who die from the spirit-
rending attack of the kender vampire are in no danger of
becoming vampires themselves, however, for these foul creatures
are the product of dark sciences and magical experimentation that
can only be duplicated with the direct intervention of Lord Soth
of Sithicus.

The kender vampire has the ability to throw back its head once
per hour and release a hideous laugh. Those within 20 yards of
the vampire when it cackles must save versus spells or be affected
as if they had looked upon a symbol of insanity. Those under the
influence of a remove fear or similar spell are immune to this at-
tack.

The kender vampire can be hit only by magical +1 or better
weapons. Non-magical wooden weapons that strike the creature
are instantly rotted and destroyed; magical wooden weapons are
entitled to a saving throw vs. acid to avoid this effect.

The mystical nature of the vampire’s physiology is such that it
is able to regain lost hit points very rapidly. Thus, the creature re-
generates 2 hit points per combat round. A raise dead spell cast
upon the monster will restore it to full hit points at once.

A kender vampire that is driven to zero hit points in combat is
not truly destroyed. Rather, its body is slain and it is forced to as-
sume its spiritual form. Because this new form is very easily de-
stroyed (see below), the kender vampire will immediately try to
flee from the combat area and return to its coffin. If it is unable to
reach its coffin within 12 turns, the creature will become trapped
in this form and remain a poltergeist until slain.

At will, the kender vampire is able to transform itself into a
purely spiritual creature similar to a poltergeist. While in this
form, it is invisible and has all of the characteristics, strengths,
and weaknesses of a common poltergeist. If the creature is slain
while in this form, it is forever dead, and the world is free of its
evil machinations.

Kender vampires are immune to sleep, charm, or hold spells
and can never be influenced by any form of mind-affecting
magic. They are wholly unaffected by all manner of toxins, poi-
Vampire, Kender

 

sons, and diseases. Spells or other attacks that rely on cold or heat
(including ice and fire) inflict only half damage to kender vam-
pires, but lightning- or electricity-based attacks inflict full dam-

e.

Tisly water splashed on a kender vampire is somewhat harmful
to them, inflicting 1d4 points of damage per vial that strikes their
flesh. Holy symbols pressed against their skin inflict a like
amount of damage and cause the creature such pain that it must
make a morale check or flee from the battle at once if possible.

Kender vampires are unable to leave the domain of Sithicus.
The strange and foul magics that created them have forged an un-
breakable bond between them and the realm of Lord Soth. Any
attempt to cross the borders of this domain (whether voluntary or
not) instantly destroys vampire. Within seconds, its body will
crumble into dust and the thing will be gone. Even drawing near
to the border is painful for these creatures, and they will seldom
come within a mile of it for fear or being forced across it and de-
stroyed.

Kender vampires are unusually easy to turn. It is thought that
this is due to the fact that their inner spirit is unbroken by their
transformation into an undead thing and, thus, they do not have
the mental stamina that similar undead do when confronting de-
voutly religious individuals. Whether or not this is the case, ken-
der vampires are turned as if they were only wraiths.

Kender vampires are not as hard to destroy as many other
types of undead, for they are greatly vulnerable to their own
hoopaks. Any vampire hunter who is able to snatch a vampire’s
hoopak from him and then turn that weapon against its owner
will find that it inflicts full damage and has no chance of being de-
stroyed like other wooden weapons. Further, any natural attack
roll of 19 or 20 indicates that the attacker has been able to impale
the creature on the end of the weapon, killing it instantly. As soon
as the creature dies (either from wounds inflicted with the hoopak
or by being impaled upon it) the body bursts into flames. In the
next few seconds, both it and the weapon are consumed by fire
and irrevocably destroyed.

The kender vampire cannot stand the sight of shimmerweed (a
crystalline plant that grows on Krynn and in some secluded areas
of Sithicus}. The mere sight of these flowers is enough to keep the
vampire from drawing within 10 yards of them. If moonlight is
falling on these flowers, the prismatic display they release is
enough to actually harm the creature, inflicting 1d4 points of
damage for each round that the plants are within 20 yards of the
vampire.

Habitat/Society: The kender vampire is a solitary creature that
exists only to do the bidding of Lord Soth of Sithicus. He is the fa-
ther of their race, and, although they despise him for what he has
done to them, they are unable to turn against him or act in any
way contrary to his interests.

Knowing the revulsion that the elves who live in his domain
feel for all manner of unnatural things, Soth felt that he could find
no better slaves than a band of undead. Aware that undead elves
might pose a threat to his own power, Soth set about the creation

 

of a new breed of undead. Drawing a small kender village
through the misty veils of Ravenloft and into his domain, he had
them killed one by one so that he could study their sufferings and
invoke carefully designed magical rituals over their bodies in at-
tempts to make them rise as undead. By the time he had finished
with these sad kender, fully half of them had died horrible deaths
and suffered unspeakable torment at the hand of the dreaded
deathknight. The results of his experiments were, however, satis-
factory to Soth, for he discovered a formula that would create a
race of vampires utterly loyal to him. It is believed that Soth has
created no fewer than 10 such monsters and no more than 30, al-
though hard evidence to support any given estimate is hard to
come by.

The typical kender vampire heads a small band of undead who
also serve Lord Soth. As a rule, each such creature will command
3-12 (3d4) other creatures, drawn from the chart below.

2d6 Roll Type of Undead

2 Beast, Undead (Stahnk)
3 Spectre

4-5 Ghast

6-8 Ghoul

9-10 Ghast

11 Spectre

12 Warrior, Skeleton

In addition to the forces generated above, the creature will
have 4-24 (4d6) Hit Dice worth of lesser undead (zombies and
skeletons) acting under its command as well.

Ecology: Kender vampires can exist only within the confines of
Lord Soth’s domain of Sithicus. They are tied to that dark land in
some mystical way that, no doubt, relates to the evil magic used
in their creation. It is possible that Lord Soth was required to in-
voke the favor of the Dark Powers in his creation of these dreaded
monsters and, thus, that he has paid some horrible price for their
loyalty to him.

Despite their links to Sithicus, the vampire kender are not natu-
ral creatures and, therefore, have no place in the biology of the
world around them, The elves in Sithicus can sense the presence
of one of these creatures whenever it comes within 100 yards of
them. At first, the elves feel only a curious sense of concern or
dread; but, as the monster draws nearer, the feeling intensifies
into one of loathing and horror. The elves describe these sad crea-
tions as vile pollutants that foul the living by their mere pres-
ences. It is unclear why only those elves native to Sithicus can
sense the kender vampire so easily.

Unlike the other vampires in Ravenloft, these creatures do not
grow more powerful with the passing of time. It is a part of their
curse that they must forever remain as they are, denied the plea-
sures of curiosity or the wanderlust that once gave their lives
meaning. It is said that the rising of the full moon reminds these
tragic souls of what they have lost and that, on that one night
each month, they are unable to do anything but sit and weep be-
side the coffin that now serves them as both home and prison.

 

 

 

 

 
Vampyre

fatto ce i

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any urban
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Pack
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Blood
INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (15-16)
TREASURE: F
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 3d4
ARMOR CLASS: 4
MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 8+3
THACO: 11

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4/1d4/1d6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below
SIZE: M (6'tall)
MORALE: Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE:

The vampyre is a foul creature that, like the much feared nosfera-
tu, exists on the blood of its victims. Unlike the nosferatu or its
vampiric cousins, however, the vampyre is not undead. Thus,
while they gain none of the powers of the undead, they have none
of the undead weaknesses either.

Vampyres look much like normal humans or half elves. They
stand just under six feet tall and are, as a rule, of exceptional
physical beauty. Some rare examples are less handsome, and a
few are actually repulsive to look upon, but these are by far the
minority. Vampyres favor the dark and somber dress of the dead
or their mourning kin, although they often employ the wanton
garb of a harlot to lure victims into their clutches. Vampyres are
generally slender of build, though their appearance hides excep-
tional physical strength, and have burning, dark eyes. Their skin
is very pale, almost white, and their features are slightly feline,
giving them a wild and exotic look. Their fingers end in deadly,
curving claws; their teeth are long and sharp, with the canines
showing clearly as fangs to any who are close enough to see them
plainly.

Vampyres have no native language, but communicate in the
tongue of those humans they live among. As a rule, any given
vampyre will know from 1-4 human or demihuman languages.

Combat: The vampyre will typically attack only helpless or sur-
prised prey. Often, a single vampyre will move out into a crowd
of humans at a tavern or similar gathering place to seek out a vic-
tim of the opposite sex. Once a suitable person is found, the vam-
pyre lures them back to its lair with teasing promises of romance
and companionship. No sooner will the door close behind the
couple, however, than the vampyre’s companions will spring to
the attack. The foul and evil nature of these creatures may mean
that the victim will linger on the edge of death for days, satisfying
the hunger of these monsters as they drink only enough blood to
keep their captive too weak to escape.

In combat, the vampyre can strike with its two ripping claws,
inflicting 1d4 points of damage with each strike; it will also bite
with its jagged, tearing teeth for an additional 1dé6 points of dam-
age. The saliva of a vampyre carries in it a foul toxin that requires

  
 
  
 
  
 

 

 

 

those bitten by the monster to make a saving throw vs. poison or
become charmed. This saving throw is modified by a -1 penalty
for every 2 points of damage done in the biting attack. Thus, a
vampyre who strikes for 3 points of damage with its bite causes its
victim to save at -2, Charmed victims will not resist the attack of
the vampyre that bit them, but they will fight on against other
vampyres.

Habitat/Society: Vampyres live in packs, usually consisting of no
more than a dozen individuals (evenly mixed between males and
females) and a half dozen young. They seldom encounter other
packs, but when they do the two bands will join together in a few
days of murderous feasting and horrific slaughter of victims.

At these times, the vampyres will mate with members from the
other group and, in 6 months, new vampyres will be born. The
young are virtually helpless until they reach the age of 5, at which
time they are able to fight as half-strength adults. When they
reach the age of 10, they are fully grown and must undergo a rit-
ual to prove that they are no longer children. Usually, this means
making an unassisted kill.

The lair of a pack of vampyres may seem to be a completely
normal human home—until they spring their trap and lash out at
those in their presence. On rare occasions, a pack of vampyres
will actually work to pass themselves off as members of a com-
munity, holding down jobs and making their bloody feeding
habits a dark secret.

Ecology: Vampyres are fierce hunters who fill the same ecological
niche as tigers or wolves—save that their prey is human. Long
ago, before man was an intelligent and social animal, they had
their place. Now, they are nightmarish creatures that stalk the
weak and innocent, fulfilling a task no longer needed.
Widow, Red

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any temperate land
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Blood & bodily fluids
INTELLIGENCE: High (13-14)
TREASURE: W, (Z)
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 4

MOVEMENT: 9, Wb 12

HIT DICE: 6+3

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1d4

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

 

SIZE: M (5 to 6’ tall)
MORALE: Average (8-10)
XP VALUE: 3,000

The red widow, or spider queen, is an evil and deadly shape
changer. Spinning a web of evil to all the lands about its lair, this
foul creature derives a vile pleasure in the murder of those lured
to it by its many charms and promises of delight.

The red widow has two physical forms. The first, and that in
which it is most commonly encountered, is a human one. In this
guise, the red widow appears as a fantastically beautiful and al-
luring woman with long, flowing red hair. The creature's dress
will vary to enable it to blend in with the human society around
it, but will always be provocative and inviting. In this form, the
creature is treated as a 0-level human, for the statistics listed
above are those for its spider form (see below).

The red widow will adopt its true form, that of a giant spider,
only when it is about to make a kill. In this shape, the creature has
a bright crimson body with a black, hourglass pattern on its back.
In effect, it looks like a giant version of the common black widow
spider, save that the colors are reversed.

Red widows seem to have no natural language of their own,
but are always fluent in the languages of those cultures with
which they come into contact.

Combat: Red widows seldom engage in open combat. Rather,
they lure unsuspecting victims near and draw them into a pas-
sionate embrace. Once this is done, they transform into their true
form. Those who witness this change (usually only the doomed
victim) must make an immediate horror check. The transforma-
tion into a giant spider takes a full round, during which the crea-
ture never releases its hold on its victim. Attempting to escape the
powerful grip of the red widow requires the victim to attempt a
roll to bend bars. Failure indicates that escape is impossible at this
time, although a new attempt is allowed each round.

Once in its spider shape, the red widow will bite its victim.
While the bite itself inflicts only 1d3 points of damage, it allows
the creature to inject a deadly poison (Class E, Immediate,
Death/20). If the creature is striking at someone it is holding, it
automatically hits. If it is trying to kill someone that has eluded its
deadly embrace, a normal attack roll is required.

The red widow is capable of releasing a jet of webbing when in
its spider form. This is handled just as if the creature were casting
a web spell.

 

When the creature is in its spider form, it has the ability to
climb sheer surfaces (just as if using a spider climb spell) and to
command spiders. In the latter case, it will be able to summon 10-
100 (10d10) spiders, Of these, 65% will be normal spiders, 20%
will be large spiders, 10% will be huge spiders, and 5% will be gi-
ant spiders. These creatures adore the red widow and will do all
that they can to protect her from harm, even at the cost of their
own lives; no morale checks are ever required of them.

Habitat/Society: The red widow often makes its home in the cities
and towns of men. Here, it moves about in its human guise and
seduces its victims under cover of darkness. It is not uncommon
for : red widow to love and then destroy a new victim every
week.

Ecology: Red widows live by draining the blood and other bodily
fluids from those they kill. A slain lover is hidden away some-
where in the creature's lair and can supply the widow with nour-
ishment for up to a week. When the monster finishes with a
corpse, it discards the partially decomposed and dehydrated
body far from its lair. In this way, it hopes that its home will es-
cape detection.

The red widow breeds by mating with a normal human. Fol-
lowing the consummation of their love, the widow kills her mate
and implants the now fertilized eggs in its body, Within a week,
these eggs hatch and consume the fluids in the corpse. Each “lit-
ter” of spiders consists of 2-8 young. These remain in spider form
(being treated as large spiders) for one year. At the end of that
time, they gain the ability to assume a human form and become
adults. Only in rare cases will young remain with their mother at
this time.

Assuming they do not die through violence or accident, the av-
erage red widow lives to be 20 to 30 years old.

 

 

 
Wolfwere, Greater

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN:  Any/Forest

FREQUENCY: Very Rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any (especially night)

DIET: Carnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (15-16)

TREASURE: 20% U, (B)

ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil

NO. APPEARING: 1-4

ARMOR CLASS: 2

MOVEMENT: 18

HIT DICE: 8+2

THACO: 11

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1, 2,,0r3

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2d8, 1d6/1d6/2d6 or 2d6/weapon +6
(see below)

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 50%

SIZE: M-L (4-9')

MORALE: Champion (15)

XP VALUE: 8000

Greater wolfweres are a bane to all who live. They are able to as-
sume three shapes at will, taking only a single round to alter
forms. Their natural shape is that of a giant dire wolf standing a
full 5‘ to 6’ tall at the shoulder. They can also assume a half-wolf/
half-human form. In this state they are 8’-9' tall with massive long
arms equipped with talon like nails. Finally, they may assume the
form of any humanoid of either sex which is between 4' and 9’ in
height.

Greater wolfweres speak common, as well as the language of
forest animals.

Combat: Greater wolfweres often employ the same strategies
used by typical wolfweres when hunting. They will change into a
humanoid of opposite sex to that of their victim. Then, using
their Charisma and singing ability, they will get close to their vic-
tim and sing their special song. Anyone failing a save versus spells
will be overcome with lethargy. The effects of this are the same as
those for a slow spell and last for 1d6 +4 rounds.

In dire wolf form, they will bite with their savage jaws, inflict-
ing 2d8 points of damage with each successful attack.

In demi-wolf form, they can strike with each of their clawed
hands (causing 1d6 points of damage each) and also bite for 2d6
points. In lieu of their claw attacks, greater wolfweres in this form
may employ weapons (gaining a bonus of +6 on their damage
rolls).

In humanoid form, they are forced to fight with weapons only
and are assumed to have a strength of 18/00 (+6 to damage).

Greater wolfweres have infravision with a 120' range, and, in
all forms except human, their eyes glow red in the dark.

Greater wolfweres have all the abilities of a first level bard
and can climb walls (55%), detect noise (25%), pick pockets
(15%), and read languages (10%).

Some exceptional individuals may be of greater level. As a
rule, 1 in 10 creatures will be of level 2-5 (1d4 +1) and 1 in 20 will
be of level 6-11 (1d6 +5).

Iron weapons (or those of a +1 enchantment) are required to
harm a greater wolfwere. However, unless the blow is instantly
fatal, the wound will quickly repair itself as the wolfwere is able
to regenerate all of its lost hit points at the end of any given
round, It is important to note, however, that severed limbs and
such are not regenerated in this fashion.

  

 

 

Greater wolfweres are somewhat more resistant to wolfsbane
than their lesser cousins and can stand the presence of that herb if
they make a saving throw versus poison. If they fail, they must
avoid it at all costs.

The how] of a greater wolfwere can summon 4d6 wolves or 2d6
dire wolves to its aid, if such creatures are in the area. These
wolves will fight most loyally on behalf of the greater wolfwere
with a +2 moral bonus.

Habitat/Society: Greater wolfweres are nearly indistinguishable
from typical wolfweres. They often team up with the latter (as-
suming positions of leadership), but seldom travel with others of
their own breed. When more than one greater wolfwere is en-
countered, they will be working together on some scheme which
requires both their efforts.

Ecology: Greater wolfweres were originally the offspring of
Harkon Lukas, Lord of Kartakass. So great was his evil power
that the children he had by female wolfweres turned out to be of
incredible power. Greater wolfweres never mate with each other;
rather, they mate with typical wolfweres. Only 10% of the chil-
dren produced by such matings result in a greater wolfwere, the
others being typical.

When the victims of a greater wolfwere attack are left to rot
and not eaten or buried properly, there is a 50% chance that a
Meekulbern plant will sprout from the corpse. The berries from
this bush are used in making Meekulbrau, a special wine of Karta-
kass.

They seem to have a near empathic link with wolves of all
types, but despise werewolves and will attack them on sight.
Zombie Lord

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any Ravenloft land
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Carrion
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: A
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 6
MOVEMENT: 6

HIT DICE: 6

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2d4/2d4
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (6' tall)
MORALE: Average (8-10)
XP VALUE: 650

The zombie lord is a living creature that has taken on the foul
powers and abilities of the undead. They are formed on rare occa-
sions as the result of a raise dead spell cast while in the demiplane
of Ravenloft.

Zombie lords look as they did in life, save that their skin has
turned the pale grey of death, and their flesh has begun to rot and
decay. The odor of vile corruption and rotting meat hangs about
them and carrion-feeding insects often buzz about them to dine
on the bits of flesh and ichor that drop from their bodies.

Zombie lords can speak those languages they knew in life and
seem to have a telepathic or mystical ability to converse freely
with the living dead. Further, they can speak to dead merely by
ins a corpse. Thus, for them at least, dead men do tell many
tales.

Combat: When the zombie lord is forced into physical combat, he
relies on the great strength of his crushing fists. Striking twice per
combat round, the monster inflicts 2d4 points of damage from
each blow that finds its mark.

The odor of death that surrounds the zombie lord is so potent
that it can cause horrible effects in those who breath it. On the
first round that a character comes within 30 yards of the monster,
he must save vs. poison or be affected in some way. The following
results are possible:

1d6 Roll Effect

Weakness (as the spell)

Cause disease (as the spell)

-1 point of Constitution

Contagion (as the spell)

Character unable to act for 1d4 rounds due to

nausea and vomiting

6 Character dies instantly and becomes a zombie
under control of the zombie lord

Om & be

All zombies within sight of the zombie lord will be subject to its
mental instructions. This includes monster and ju-ju zombies, but
not Strahd or yellow musk creeper zombies. Further, the creature
can use the senses of any zombie that is within one mile of it and,
thus, know all that is happening within a very large area.

Once per day, the zombie lord can use an animate dead spell to
transform dead creatures into zombies. This works just as de-

 

 

scribed in the Player's Handbook except that it can also be used
on the living. Any single living creature with fewer Hit Dice than
the zombie lord can be attacked in this manner in lieu of the cast-
ing of this spell in its normal fashion. A target who fails a saving
throw vs. death is instantly slain. In 1d4 combat rounds, the slain
creature will rise again as a zombie under the foul zombie lord's
command.

The zombie lord has the same immunities to spells (sleep,
charm, hold, and the like) that normal zombies do. In addition,
they suffer the same 2d4 points of damage from contact with holy
water or holy symbols. They are turned as vampires, however.

Habitat/Society: The zombie lord seeks out places of death as
lairs. Often, they will live in old graveyards or on the site of a tre-
mendous battle—anyplace that there are many bodies to animate
and feast upon.

The mind of a zombie master tends to focus on death and the
creation of more undead. The regions around their lairs are often
littered with the decaying bodies, often half eaten, of those who
have tried to confront the foul creature. They seldom have gran-
diose schemes like those often undertaken by vampires or liches,
but will frequently plan to take over a small town and turn its en-
tire populace into living corpses.

Ecology: The zombie lord comes into being by chance, and only
under certain conditions. First, an evil human being (the soon-to-
be zombie lord) must die at the hands of an undead creature. Sec-
ond, an attempt to raise the slain character must be made. Third,
and last, the character must fail his resurrection survival roll. It is
believed that the zombie lord can be created only in Ravenloft,
but this is not proven absolutely for they have been encountered
in other lands from time to time.

 

 

 
 

 

 

They lurk in the shadows.
They linger in your dreams.
They strike from the darkness.

: mY “7% They are the foul and horrible creatures
b A 5 egy that dwell in the dark dimension of

ie ati Ravenloft and they are waiting for you.

. * Inside this book are elven vampires, the
ts F i dreaded Dark Ones who have broken
the trust of Vistani, and dozens of other creatures sure to add a
taste of fear to every Ravenloft campaign.

But be warned, those who enter the Mists of Ravenloft are
seldom heard from again...

TSR, Inc ; Da Bch
POB 756 - 120 Church End, Cherry Hinton
Fe a ae Typ eget als eB)
WI 53147 U.S.A. United Kingdom

ee ts eee ee ele ee a ee |
ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS is a registered trademark owned by TSR, Inc.
RAVENLOFT and the TSR logo are trademarks owned by TSR, Inc.

ISBN 1-56076-108-3

PCR he ae
ene PAPEL Car UT

 
