 

Ieee

   

 

 

Monstrous Compendium

Fiend FForio
Appendix

 
 
  
 

 

 

é 3
| i
i |

RPGA

 

An assortment of creatures, malevolent and benign!
 

  
 

Kn

Dungeons/jys)ragons}

   
 

PE ren

 

Monstrous Compendium

cFietie “ NiO

pendix

Coordination: Skip Williams and Jean Rabe

Designers: Wes Nicholson, Greg Swedberg, Al Boyce, Donald J. Bingle,
John Terra, Kris and Steve Hardinger, Rob Nicholls, Vince Garcia,
Norm Ritchie, and Tim Beach

Original Design Concept for Monstrous Compendium:

David "Zeb" Cook, Steve Winter, and Jon Pickens

Editor: Linda M. Bingle

Typesetting: Angelika Lokotz

Artistic Coordination: Peggy Cooper

Cover Art: Jeff Easley

Interior Art: Tom Baxa, Mark Nelson, SR Bissette

 

About This Product

The original FIEND FOLIO® tome was published in 1981, and was a product of TSR’s United Kingdom division. Advertised as a “Tome of
creatures malevolent and benign,” it featured an odd compilation of monsters with unusual appearances and abilities. The tome was
especially popular in Britain.

Now updated for the AD&D® 2nd Edition Game, the new FIEND FOLIO Appendix offers a fresh look at these beasties. In some cases
they are more powerful, in other cases they have expanded and enhanced abilities. This compendium also features a few new creatures.

This revised tome is brought to you by the RPGA™ Network, an international organization of gaming enthusiasts. Though based in
Lake Geneva, the organization has branches in Australia and the U.K. The monsters were updated by Network authors and edited by
another Network member.

If you are interested in joining the RPGA Network, write for a membership form to: RPGA Network, P.O. Box 515, Lake Geneva, WI.,
53147.

Just so you know who did what in this compendium, here's a listing.

Tim Beach: Amethyst, Crystal, Emerald, Sapphire and Topaz Gem Dragons, Al-mi'raj, Crabman, Darter, Denzelian, Flawder, Garbug,
Mantari, Quaggoth, Scathe, Urdunnir

Donald J. Bingle: Dark Creeper, Dark Stalker, Dune Stalker, Faux Faerie, Firedrake, Giant—Fog, Gibberling, Gambado

Wes Nicholson: Adherer, Algoids, Apparition, Caterwaul, Coffer Corpse, Fire Falcon, Stwinger

Kris & Steve Hardinger: Gorbel, Hellcat, Iron Cobra, Ice Lizard, Khargra, Mephits, Spanner, Symbiotic Jelly

John Terra: Penanggalan, Phantom Stalker, Pernicon, Retriever, Ruve, Sheet Ghoul, Sheet Phantom, Thunder Children

Rob Nicholls: Shocker, Sussurus

Greg Swedberg, Al Boyce: Fyrefly, Terithran, Troll—Ice, Tween, Umpleby, Volt, Xill, Xvart

Vince Garcia: Aballin, Zygraat.

Norm Ritchie: Achaierai, Grimlock

Random House and its affiliate Companies have worldwide distribution rights in the book trade for English language products of TSR, Ine. Distributed to the book and hobby trade in the United Kingdom by TSK

Ltd. Distributed to the toy and hobby trade by regional distributors, This work is protected under the copyright laws of the Linited States of America. Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the material or
artwork herein is prohibited without the express written consent of TSR, Ine,

©1992 TSR. Ine. All Rights Reserved, Printed in the U.S.A. ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AD&D and FIEND POLIO are registered trademarks owned by TSK, Inc. The TSK logo and RPGA are
trademarks owned by TSE, Inc,

TSR, Inc. TSR Ltd.
POB 756 120 Church End, Cherry Hinton
Lake Geneva, Cambridge CB1 3LB
WI 53147 USA United Kingdom

 
Aballin

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate or tropical/Wilderness or
subterranean

FREQUENCY: Uncommon

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Average (9)

TREASURE: |

ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO, APPEARING: 1-4

ARMOR CLASS: 4

MOVEMENT: 6, Sw 15

HIT DICE: 3

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: Special

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Drowning

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: L (10')

MORALE: Very Steady (14)

XP VALUE: 270

Also known as living water, aballins are fluid monsters which
entrap and drown creatures unfortunate enough to venture
within their reach.

Aballins in their passive state present the appearance of large
puddles of seemingly normal water, devoid of fish or other liv-
ing creatures. However, those looking down at the aballin often
notice coins, jewelry, or other metal effects of the monster's past
victims resting beneath the surface of the water, apparently
awaiting recovery. Though they resemble an elemental creature
of water, aballins are actually comprised of a weak acid, which
over the course of approximately three weeks digests organic
matter, leaving behind items made of metal. Because of this,
spells such as water breathing offer no help in surviving the ef-
fect of drowning in their fluids.

Combat: In its passive state, the aballin is indistinguishable
from fresh water, and cannot be harmed by attacks which
would otherwise prove harmless to that element. Such an un-
threatening appearance often results in potential prey attempt-
ing to take a refreshing drink, or to simply move through the
monster or reach in to recover tempting valuables. Any of these
actions arouse the aballin to attack, and the creature instantly
alters its molecular structure into a gelatinous pseudopod that
lashes out and tries to envelop a victim. If its attack roll thus
succeeds, a man-sized or smaller creature is drawn within and
begins suffocating.

While in this gelatinous state, the Aballin becomes susceptible
to attacks by blunt weapons of +1 or greater enchantment.
Edged weapons have no effect whatever, and actually have a
25% risk of instead striking any person trapped within the abal-
lin's ameboid form.

Aballins are immune to fire, cold, electricity, poison, and pa-
ralysis. A transmute water to dust spell will cause an aballin to
make a save vs. death; if it fails, it will perish. A lower water

 

spell will force the creature to make a save vs. spells or release
its victim immediately.

Aballins have no eyes, Instead, they keep track of their vic-
tims through scent and vibration, For this reason, they are im-
mune to all spells or attacks which alter vision or which affect
the subject through vision. These include invisibility, color
spray, hypnotic pattern, most illusions, fire charm, blindness.
blur, and many others.

Habitat/Society: While sometimes seen outdoors masquerading
as a puddle, small pond or fountain—or even a drainage ditch—
an aballin is most often encountered in damp cavernous areas
with an abundance of water, which permits it to blend in with its
surroundings. While in the element of water, the monster is nat-
urally invisible, and so it prefers to rest within the shelter of
pools or other small bodies of water.

The aballin is able to propel itself through water with
amazing speed, and occasionally traverses lakes, rivers or
streams in search of food. It may also move slowly upon land by
“oozing,” or by laboriously extending its gelatinous pseudopods
and inching itself forward, much like a slug. In fact, like this
creature, the aballin leaves a faintly discernible slimy trail when
traveling upon land, Due to its semi-liquid composition, the
creature is incapable of ascending surfaces with greater than a
30 degree slope.

Aballins can be encountered either singly or in families of up
to four individuals. Mated pairs occasionally function as a sin-
gle entity, with doubled size and Hit Dice, particularly if there
are any young present.

Ecology: These monsters occasionally prove useful in keeping
down the population of other harmful creatures or plants which
might be found in or near water. They also function as scaven-
gers, digesting any remains they happen upon in their travels.
 

——

Achaierai

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Subterranean
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Small Flocks
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivorous
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: F
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic Evil
NO. APPEARING: 1-8

ARMOR CLASS: 8 (Legs AC -1)
MOVEMENT: 18

HIT DICE: Body 40 hp; Legs 15 hp each
THACO: 17 (claws)/11 (beak)
NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACKS: 1-8/1-8/1-10
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Toxic Smoke
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 35%

SIZE: H (15' tall)
MORALE: Special

XP VALUE: 2,000

The body of an Achaierai looks like a huge spherical head, with
a powerful beak, feathered crest and stunted wings. Four metal-
lic legs, each 8-9' long, extend from the underside and end in
strong taloned feet. The legs are a metallic blue-gray, the head-
body a dull scarlet mottled with deep red. The crest can be of
almost any color, but the most common is a bright flame red.

Combat: The birdlike Achaierai attack fearlessly, never needing
to check morale if in a flock. However, individuals will attempt
to flee if they lose a leg. Though flightless, Achaierai can often
elude pursuers because of their speed.

Only damage to the soft and vulnerable body of an Achaierai
will slay it. A single attack on a leg with an edged weapon,
which causes at least 15 hp of damage, will sever a leg. Multiple
attacks of any type causing 15 hp or more damage to a single leg
will render the leg useless, but will not sever it. Area effect at-
tacks will damage all legs within the area affected only if the
creature fails its save against the attack. The loss of one leg does
not affect its movement rate, but the loss of two will reduce its
movement by half.

If an Achaierai loses three legs or is otherwise seriously
wounded, it will release a cloud of poisonous black smoke in
approximately a 10' radius sphere. All creatures within the
cloud (except Achaierai) take 2-12 points of damage and must
save vs. poison or suffer insanity for three hours (treat as a
feeblemind spell), The injured bird will attempt to flee in the
confusion, crawling at a movement rate of 2 if three legs have
been lost. An injured leg will heal fully in one or two days, but
these birds do not possess other regenerative powers and a sev-
ered leg will not be regrown.

A flock of Achaierai will attack in an organized manner, often
attacking first those opponents they deem to be the most dan-
gerous. No more than two can attack a man-sized creature at
one time. Opponents who are man-sized or smaller are usually
not able to reach the body of the Achaierai to attack it, Like-
wise, the bird cannot normally attack these opponents with its
beak and will instead fight with two claws.

Habitat/Society: These foul birds originate from some ages-old
infernal lower plane. The entire race was summoned to this
plane long ago for some long-forgotten evil purpose, and none

 

 

 

 

 

 

now exist on any other known plane. Though unable to breed
on this plane, they are extremely long-lived, and remnants of
the original flocks still exist. These creatures roam in dark, un-
explored areas underground, attacking all they meet, perhaps
still seeking to carry out the commands of their long-dead sum-
moners.

Achaierai are almost always found underground, except for
rare sightings at night, when they may venture out into the
shadowy entrance area of their large cavern complexes, They
will often use an area with several small chambers as a “nesting
area.” Though no longer fertile, these birds pair for life and will
attack with great ferocity (+2 to hit) if their mates or nesting
sites are threatened.

Though they organize into small flocks and mating pairs,
Achaierai have no true society and will turn on each other in
hard times, attacking weaker members of the flock and devour-
ing them. Therefore, when single Achaierai are sighted they will
often (40% chance) be birds who have lost one or more legs and
are afraid to travel with others of their own kind.

Rarely, (10% of the time) a flock will have a “leader” of excep-
tional size and abilities, These individuals have 60 hp for their
bodies and 25 hp for each leg. They are +2 both to hit and on
damage and are able to use their toxic smoke breath weapon up
to four times per day.

Ecology: Achaierai are true carnivores, devouring only meat,
although they are not at all fussy about the freshness of their
meals. Because of their size, they must devour an astounding
amount of meat every day, and will resort to scavenging or can-

‘nibalism as the need arises. They are feared and hunted by the

underground races such as drow and deep gnomes, whose vil-
lages and livestock are decimated by the appearance of a flock
of ravenous Achaierai. Areas in close proximity to these vora-
cious creatures have generally been picked clean of other living
beings.
 

Adherer

MC14

 

 

Temperate forest

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN:

FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Pack
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Semi- (2-4)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil
NO. APPEARING: 1-4
ARMOR CLASS: 3
MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 4

THACO: 17

NO, OF ATTACKS: 1

 

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-3

 

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Adhesion
SPECIAL DEFENSES: — Adhesion
MAGIC RESISTANCE: — Special
SIZE: M (5-6' tall)
MORALE: Steady (12)
XP VALUE: 650

At first glance the adherer seems like a mummy, with folds of
off-white skin resembling filthy bandages. Adherers can be dis-
tinguished from mummies by the sour, mucilaginous smell that
accompanies them, The smell comes from a resin-like secretion
with adhesive properties that is constantly exuded through the
pores of the adherer’s skin.

Combat: The standard attack form of the adherer is to lie in wait
for its victim, usually covering its sticky body with twigs and
leaves in order to blend in with the surrounding environment.
Due to the adherer’s skill at concealing itself, its victims suffer a
-4 to their surprise rolls. However, this reliance on surprise
means that if it is spotted before it can leap onto its victim, it
will flee 40% of the time.

A concealed adherer will then leap out onto the closest target
and attempt to attach itself by means of the adhesive resin
which covers all portions of the adherer's body. Once attached,
the adherer will punch, kick, and, if possible, suffocate its vic-
tim. If the adherer is being attacked by companions of its in-
tended victim, it will attempt to use the victim as a living shield
between itself and the attacker.

Due to the secretions from the adherer, all edged or blunt
weapons will stick to its body, doing only half the normal dam-
age. Piercing weapons do full damage but will require the next
melee round to pull free. The adhesive is so strong it requires a
strength of 22 to break free, but fire, boiling liquids, or the
adherer’s own body fluids can weaken the bond. Boiling liquids
will reduce the effects of the resin for one combat round only, to
the point at which a strength of 12 can break free. After one
round, the resin returns to full strength once more.

The flammable nature of the resin in the adherer's body
makes it particularly susceptible to fire attacks. It will take full
damage from normal fire (no roll necessary). Any type of magi-

 

 

 

 

 

 

cal fire requires a saving throw vs. spells for the adherer: success
means the adherer takes normal damage; failure means double
damage.

Despite its mummy-like appearance, the adherer is not an un-
dead creature, and therefore it cannot be turned by a priest or
paladin. Adherers are immune to all first level spells and to nor-
mal] missiles.

Habitat/Society: Adherers are territorial creatures that tend to
live in shallow caves, either alone or in a small group. The pack
does not have a leader; each creature acts on its own instincts.

Whether or not there are other adherers about, there is a good
chance that the adherer will share its dwelling with at least one
large spider, Adherers seem to be able to communicate telepath-
ically with arachnids and will often co-operate with them to
trap prey. Spider webs are particularly favored by adherers as
part of their disguise. Adherers will never attack any type of
spider.

The lair of an adherer is generally clean, since everything ex-
cept stone sticks to the body. The creature can voluntarily re-
lease items attached to its body by secreting a solvent to the
sticky resin. Adherers normally hide their treasures in a pile of
rotting vegetation in or near their lair.

Ecology: Adherers do not breed like mammals or reptiles. Sages
have suggested that the adherer simply splits into two creatures
if there is enough prey in the area to support more than one. The
normal lifespan of an adherer is 35 years.

All attempts to use the adherer's bodily secretions to make
potions, adhesives, or any other item, have failed. The fluid
loses its potency within 12 hours of the creature's death, and no
magical or mundane means has been found to prevent or even
slow this deterioration.

©7992 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved
 

_

Algoid

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate swamp

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Pack

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Semi- (2-4)

TREASURE: D(X */2)

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1-6

ARMOR CLASS: 5

MOVEMENT: 6

HIT DICE: 5

THACO: 15

NO, OF ATTACKS: 2

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-10/1-10

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Stun

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Immune to edged weapons of less
than +2 bonus

MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below

SIZE: M (5-7' tall)

MORALE: Steady (11)

XP VALUE: 420

Algoids appear to be primitive humanoids with green skin and
coarse features, sometimes mistaken for trolls at first glance.
They are, however, not animals at all, but colonies of intelligent
algae that have developed mobility by organizing in this way.

The height of an algoid varies from 5 to 7 feet, depending on
how many individual cells combine to form it. Similarly, its
weight will vary from 115 to 250 pounds.

Combat: The algoid attacks with two large “fists” in a down-
ward, pounding fashion, Each fist inflicts 1-10 points of dam-
age. In addition, on a roll of 19 or 20, the algoid will inflict
maximum (10 points) damage and stun its victim for 1-4 rounds,
Edged and piercing weapons of less than +2 magical bonus in-
flict no damage on an algoid. Those with +2 or better bonuses
inflict half normal damage. Blunt weapons inflict normal dam-
age, even if they are non-magical.

Algoids have an empathic link to willow, water-oak, cypress,
and other water-loving trees. They can use this link to control 1
or 2 trees and make them attack a party. The trees have a move-
ment of 3, and attack twice per round for 1-10 points of damage.
The THACO of the tree(s) depends on its size, but will never be
less than 15. Fire and electrical attacks, whether magical or not,
do no damage to an algoid,

Lower water, part water, and destroy water each inflict 1-6
points of damage per level of the caster (maximum 10d6), All
other spells work normally on an algoid.

Habitat/Society: Algoids must live near water of some sort. It
need not be running water, although slow-moving streams and
rivers are preferred. Nor does the water need to be fresh. Some
of the more successful colonies of algoids have been discovered
in river deltas, taking the salt or fresh water equally well.
Algoids are possessed of a “hive” intelligence and societal
structure. There is no hierarchy to algoid society. Algoids gener-
ally do not form their humanoid shape unless they feel threat-
ened, or the colony wants to move. The humanoid shape is

 

 

 

 

 

formed by joining with the nearest other cells until a mobile unit
is formed, If a colony is large enough to form more than one
“body”, the cells will not always group together in the same
way. Thus, one cell may be part of a 250-pound humanoid to-
day, and part of a different 170-pound one tomorrow.

Ecology: Since it is a plant, the algoid relies on photosynthesis
for its metabolism to function. Warm, brackish water is the pre-
ferred breeding ground for large colonies, but they can breed in
colder water. Algoids cannot survive for more than a few days
without natural light. As they suffer from light deprivation,
their color changes from green to dark green to almost black.
Dead algoids are completely black. This death is similar to the
starvation of a mammal, and no creature of good alignment
should do this to an algoid.

Priests and alchemists value the black algoids, as they can be
powdered and used in the manufacture of salves and as an ingre-
dient in the reduction of gold ore. Algoids killed in combat, and
then left in darkness, do not turn black, but simply rot away in
the same fashion as other vegetation.

Purple Algoid

A much rarer variety of algoid, the purple algoid is found only
in arctic climates, surviving directly from the ice and snow and
limited sunlight. These creatures cannot control trees as their
temperate cousins do, but can communicate with small sea-
dwelling crustaceans. The algoid will often have the crustaceans
lure unsuspecting fishing boats to their area, then attack by

‘swimming under the vessel and pounding one or more holes in

the hull. The algoid then allows the sea creatures to feast on the
bodies while it devours the wooden parts of the vessel.

Purple algoids do not go black if starved of light. They turn a
fluorescent blue instead. If powdered, this substance can be used
to dye cloth.
Al-mP’raj

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate forests, hills, and grass-
lands

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Herd

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Herbivore

INTELLIGENCE: Animal (1)

TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 2-20

ARMOR CLASS: 6

MOVEMENT: 18

HIT DICE: 1

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil

 

 

SPECIAL DEFENSES: _ Teleportation, immunity to poison
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 25%
SIZE: 5S (3' at shoulder)
MORALE: Fanatic (17-18)
XP VALUE: Normal 65
Psionic 420

Al-mi'raj are rather stupid creatures, but are potentially danger-
ous because of their unpredictable nature. They resemble large
rabbits with long, soft fur. A single black horn, one to two feet
long and spiraled like that of a unicorn, protrudes from the fore-
head. Although most al-mi'raj have yellow fur, white, pink, and
even light green specimens have been seen.

Though the origin of the al-mi'raj is unknown, they may be
an example of a failed “science” project conducted by Krynnish
gnomes, though the creatures are found on many worlds. They
are often kept as pets by gnomes, and “al-mi'raj,’ in an ancient
gnomish dialect, means “experiment seventy-two.”

Combat: Like normal rabbits, al-mi'raj are rather nervous crea-
tures, Rather than hopping away when threatened, however, al-
mi'raj become aggressive and vicious. They leap at the
offending intruder, attempting to stab with their horns.

Al-mi'raj are also able to teleport short distances, giving them
the nickname “blink bunnies.” They blink to and fro seemingly
without pattern, attempting to avoid attack. The al-mi'raj ap-
pears about 3’ from its opponent and immediately hops to the
attack. Al-mi'raj teleport on a roll of 4 or better on a 6-sided die.
To determine where the creature appears, roll an 8-sided die: 1
= in front of opponent, 2 = left front, 3 = left, 4 = left rear, 5
= directly behind, 6 = right rear, 7 = right, 8 = right front.

Because of a quirk in their breeding, a few adults, about 10%,
have psionic abilities. If an al-mi'raj sits still instead of jumping to
attack an opponent, it is sure to be psionically endowed. It will
almost always use its powers in the following order: control light
to cause the sky to darken, control wind to cause the wind to
blow, levitation to rise into the air, and molecular agitation to
cause items to heat and burn. Then it will use telekinesis to throw
rocks, control flame to move fire about, and detonation to cause
weapons and armor to explode. After it levitates, it uses control
winds to fly about, its eyes glowing redly, as it harasses its oppo-
nents. If attacked physically, it will try to blink away.

Al-mi'raj are immune to poison.

Psionics Summary:
Level Dis/Sci/Dev
3 1/2/3

Score PSPs
10 250

Attack/ Defense
MT/M-

 

 

 

 

 

Powers:

¢ Psychokinesis - Sciences: detonate, telekinesis, Devotions:
control flames, control light, control winds, levitation, molecu-
lar agitation.

Habitat/Society: Al-mi'raj live fairly peaceful lives as long as
they are left to themselves. They roam about pastures and
woodlands, eating all manner of plants. Their lairs are usually
above-ground nests composed of fur, grass, and twigs. Al-mi'raj
of the same herd tend to build nests close together.

During the spring mating season, the males “joust” with their
horns, competing for the favors of the females. About two
months after mating, the female gives birth to a litter of 2-12
cute, cuddly babies with nubs where their horns will later grow.
It takes an al-mi'raj about a year to reach full growth.

Psionic al-mi'raj, sometimes known as “bunnies of the
Abyss,” develop their powers as adults, Except when the herd is
attacked, they act in all respects like normal al-mi'raj.

Ecology: Because they breed rather quickly, al-mi'raj can be-
come a problem in any area where there are few natural preda-
tors, They can decimate natural vegetation or destroy entire
fields of crops. Their nesting areas can also become dangerously
impassable. The conglomeration of twiggy nests makes move-
ment difficult, and the large numbers of “blink bunnies” defend-
ing their young is a formidable obstacle.

The bodies of al-mi'raj are very useful: their fur is soft and
warm, their meat is tasty, and their horns are useful in cures for
poison. Some gnomish communities have a superstitious belief
that an al-mi'raj's hind feet bring good luck, and although
gnomes have stopped the practice of carrying them around,
some homes are still decorated with al-mi'raj feet.

If captured when very young, al-mi'raj show a surprising ap-
titude for training—except for the psionic variety, which have
an unfortunate tendency to detonate the possessions of their
trainers. The al-mi‘raj’s fearlessness cam make them useful com-
panions.

©1992 TSH. Inc All Fights Reserved
 

Apparition

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Tribal

ACTIVITY CYCLE: — Any

DIET: Nil

INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)

TREASURE: E

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil

NO. APPEARING: 1-4

ARMOR CLASS: 0

MOVEMENT: 24

HIT DICE: 8

THACO: See below

NO. OF ATTACKS: |

DAMAGE/ATTACK: See below

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Hit only by magical or silver weap-
ons

MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: M (4'1"-7')

MORALE: Very Steady (13)

XP VALUE: 1400

Apparitions are a particularly horrible and persistent form of
undead, existing primarily on the Ethereal Plane. They are able
to move easily between the Ethereal Plane and the Prime Mate-
rial Plane twice per day, requiring only one round for the transi-
tion.

They appear on the Prime Material Plane as skeletons, loose-
ly shrouded with filthy bandages. They are semi-solid in form
only during any round in which they are attacking; otherwise,
they are airy and insubstantial.

Combat: Apparitions have the ability to “pop in” from any
solid, non-living object, such as walls, floors, or furniture. Op-
ponents therefore suffer a —5 to their surprise rolls.

Apparitions can telepathically sense any creature of greater
than 5 Intelligence at a range of 100 feet in any direction, al-
though they have no other psionic abilities. Since they are non-
corporeal, apparitions can travel directly to their intended
destination without being hindered by clumsy physical barriers
such as locked doors.

The apparition is not able to physically attack its victim.
Rather, it uses an improved form of suggestion, an innate abili-
ty, to convince the victim that he/she is being strangled by its
bony claws. There is no need to make an attack roll for this at-
tack. Victims must make an Intelligence check at —4 to disbe-
lieve, even if they are aware that they are being attacked by an
apparition. A successful check means that the victim cannot
thenceforth be harmed by that particular apparition. A failure
means the victim must make a Constitution check: success
means the victim flees as though affected by a fear spell for 1-4
rounds (during which time the apparition may attack again);
failure means the victim has been literally “scared to death.” The

 

 

 

 

 

victim will immediately die of fright, unless a remove fear spell
is cast upon him/her in the same round as the attack. Protection
from evil or protection from evil, 10' radius spells already in
effect at the time of the attack will assure a successful Constitu-
tion check, If the slain victim's life is restored, he/she will for-
ever after automatically fail his/her Intelligence roll to
disbelieve. However, if a slain victim is not restored to life with-
in 24 hours, he/she will rise as an apparition 2-8 hours later.

Apparitions can be attacked on the Prime Material Plane only
during the one melee round it takes them to attack their victim.
Only magical or silver weapons can affect the apparition in this
form. On its home plane, it can be attacked normally. The appa-
rition has an AC of 5 on the Ethereal Plane.

An apparition can be turned by a cleric as though it were a
spectre or 8 HD undead creature.

Habitat/Society: Apparitions have no structured society, al-
though newly-created apparitions will often stay close to the ap-
parition which killed them until they adjust to their new
circumstances. They do not build dwellings, nor do they have
lairs, as they have no need of either sleep or sustenance. Any
incidental treasure they may have found is generally left at the
scene of combat.

Ecology: An apparition which is “killed” on the Prime Material
Plane will reform on the Ethereal Plane in 5-8 days, and will
seek out its killer as soon as it is able. Only by killing it on its
home plane can it be truly destroyed.

Victims who are left by their party to become apparitions will
often (80% ) seek out the surviving members of their band in an
attempt to inflict the same fate on them.
 

Caterwaul

MC14

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate mountains
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Generally night
DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: Q(x 4)
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil

 

NO, APPEARING:

1

 

 

 

ARMOR CLASS: 6 or better (See below)
MOVEMENT: 18 or 24

HIT DICE: 4+2

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3+ (see below)
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4/1-4/1-6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Screech, rake
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Haste

MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: M (5' long)
MORALE: Steady (12)

XP VALUE: 270

Caterwauls are vicious feline predators with short, midnight-
blue fur, yellow eyes and a long, prehensile tail, The face has an
almost elven look, with its delicately pointed ears and almond-
shaped eyes.

Combat: The caterwaul's preferred method of attack is to hide
in a tree or rock outcropping above a trail and leap onto its vic-
tim, chasing it only if necessary, Caterwauls are able to move on
their hind legs at great speed (18), then drop to all fours to move
even faster (24). The caterwaul attacks with two claws for 1-4
points of damage, plus a bite for 1-6 points. In addition, if a
caterwaul strikes with unmodified “to hit" rolls of 18 or better
with both claws, it may rake twice for a further 1-6 points of
damage per rake.

Once per turn, the caterwaul can emit a high-pitched, keening
sound in addition to its melee attacks. This keening inflicts 1-8
points of damage on all creatures within 60 feet unless they save
against breath weapons. Caterwauls usually use this attack dur-
ing their first round of melee. Also once per turn, a caterwaul
can haste itself, gaining a +4 bonus to its Armor Class and gain-
ing double normal attacks and movement. The caterwaul can-
not keen or make melee attacks during the round in which it
hastes itself. The haste lasts seven rounds.

Habitat/Society: The caterwaul is normally a militantly solitary
creature, leaving its mother after only three months of life. The
normal lifespan of a caterwaul is 5 years. During its life it will
breed a maximum of three times. Caterwauls do not mate for
life, as this would necessitate a permanent companion.
Caterwauls are generally found in low mountains, especially
those with thick vegetation. Like most felines, the caterwaul
hates water, but it can swim if necessary. Its diet is exclusively

 

 

 

 

 

meat, generally large rodents, but larger prey is not uncommon,
and it will occasionally supplement its hunting with a raid on
domestic sheep or cattle. After killing something the size of a
sheep or larger, the caterwaul will gorge itself, and then it may
not hunt again for up to ten days. It will, however, defend its
territory at any time from all intruders. The caterwaul is not a
scavenger, and will not even finish off its own kills if they are
more than a day old.

The caterwaul can climb virtually any surface (95% climb
skill), move silently (85% ), and hide in shadows (75%). During
its life, a caterwaul will not roam more than about 8 miles from
its lair, once it has established its territory. The lair of a cater-
waul will be heavily marked with vertical grooves, where the
creature has honed its claws. There will also be a pungent odor,
as the entrance to the lair is heavily marked by the caterwaul's
scent glands to warn off other creatures.

Caterwaul's treasure is not normally as valuable as it might
seem at first. They collect shiny objects of all shapes and sizes,
and any hoard will be mostly worthless bits of quartz and shiny
stones.

The caterwaul's prehensile tail is of little use in combat, but
the creature will often use its tail to secure its food for eating. It
will also use it as a sort of “hand” to brush twigs or other ob-
structions out of its line of sight when it is waiting in ambush.
Like most cats, the caterwaul’s tail is also an elegant indicator of
the creature's emotions.

Ecology: Caterwauls have no natural enemy, including man.
They hunt only for food, and fight to defend their territory. The
claws of a caterwaul may be used in the creation of a sword of
sharpness. Its fur is prized for its unusual color, but must be
carefully treated to remove the caterwaul's scent.

©1992 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Crabman

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate to tropical sea coasts
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Tribal

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low to average (5-10)
TREASURE: Nil (In lair: KX 5, LX 5, C)
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 2-12

ARMOR CLASS: 4

MOVEMENT: 9, Sw 6

HIT DICE: 3

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6/1-6

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil

SPECIAL DEFENSES: _ Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: M-L (7'-10' tall)
MORALE: Steady (11-12)

XP VALUE: 65

 

 

Crabmen are man-sized intelligent crabs. They walk upright on
two pairs of legs. The small pincers tipping the short arms above
their legs are used for fine manipulation. The two longer arms
end in large claws. Two slender eyestalks bob above the beak-
like collection of mandibles which makes up the crabman's
mouth, Male crabmen are often brightly colored and females
may be reddish-brown, green, or black.

Combat: Though generally peaceful, crabmen will fight back
with their large claws if attacked, causing 1d6 points of damage
per hit, Males of certain subspecies have an enlarged claw on
one side which does 1d8 damage. Crabmen have never been
known to wield weapons.

If severed, a crabman’s limbs and eyestalks will grow back in
1-4 weeks.

At certain times, population pressure and food shortages will
cause crabmen to voraciously hunt other creatures. Most such
attacks are directed towards other tribes of crabmen or other
coastal inhabitants. However, they will occasionally raid
coastal towns for food, attacking anything that moves. Such
savage frenzies last only a few days, during which the crabman
population is generally reduced back to a tolerable level.

Habitat/Society: Crabmen live as simple hunter-gatherers, sub-
sisting primarily on carrion and algae. Much of each crabman’s
day is spent hunting, filtering algae, or scavenging along the
shore. Crabman often gather large amounts of sand into their
mouths, suck out all the organic material, and spit out fist-sized
pellets of sand and dirt. These hardened pellets betray the pres-
ence of a nearby crabman lair.

Crabmen generally live in coastal caves. Some tribes dig ex-
tensive burrows in seaside cliffs. Within a burrow complex,
each crabman has an individual Jair, situated near a large, cen-
tral meeting area.

Males and females are found in approximately equal numbers
in a tribe, They mate at irregular times throughout the year. The
female produces about 100 eggs within two weeks. They are laid
in the ocean, where they hatch into clear, soft-shelled, crablike
larvae. In six months they molt, develop a stronger shell, and
begin to dwell on land. The eggs and larvae are delicious, and
predators greatly reduce their numbers before they reach adult-
hood. Larvae are almost defenseless, with AC 8, 1 HD, and

 

 

 

 

weak claws which do only 1-2 points of damage per hit.

Crabmen continue to grow and molt throughout their lives,
and specimens as tall as 10 feet have been reported. A crabman
can live for up to 20 years.

A crabman tribe seldom has commerce with other tribes, and
almost never with other intelligent races. They produce few arti-
facts, primarily seaweed weavings, driftwood carvings, and
seashell constructions. Though these are often impermanent,
some are quite beautiful. Though details of crabman religion are
unknown, most artifacts are believed to be religious in nature,
and are jealously guarded.

Each tribe appears to be led by a dominant, elder male or fe-
male. These leaders have maximum hit points, but are otherwise
unremarkable,

Crabmen speak their own language, which consists mostly of
hisses and clicks. The crabmen’s xenophobia and the extreme
difficulty of their language make it virtually impossible for hu-
mans and similar races to learn to speak the crabman tongue.
Those few sages who know anything about the language know
only a few basic words.

Crabmen are attracted to shiny metal, particularly silver-
colored metal, though they seem unable to differentiate between
silver, platinum, and steel. Crabman lairs often contain piles of
these metals, with many pieces worked into sculptures. If the
metal has rusted or tarnished, it is sometimes scraped to reveal
the shine again, but often simply thrown into a refuse pile.

Ecology: Crabman artifacts can sometimes bring good prices
from collectors, though they are often fragile, and readily de-
compose if made of plants.

Crabmen are rumored to be very tasty, especially their legs
and claws. Primitive coastal inhabitants, particularly sahuagin,
consider them a delicacy and often raid crabman villages. Their
shells dry out and become brittle soon after they are removed or
molted, so they cannot be used as armor. The claws can be used
as passable clubs.
 

Coffer Corpse

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any
FREQUENCY: Very Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: B
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 8
MOVEMENT: 6

HIT DICE: 2

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: l
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6 or by weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Hit only by magical weapons
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: M (4'1"-7')
MORALE: Average (9)
XP VALUE: 65

The coffer corpse is an undead creature seeking its final rest. It
will always be encountered on a stranded funeral barge, un-
burnt pyre, or the scene of some other incomplete death ritual.
Coffer corpses look like zombies. They hate life, and will attack
any living humanoid creature which disturbs them.

Combat: The coffer corpse attacks in combat with whatever
weapon it was to be buried with, doing the standard damage for
that weapon. Only about 25% of coffer corpses have weapons.
If it has no weapon, the coffer corpse attacks with its bare
hands, attempting to lock them around the victim's throat. If it
succeeds, it will fasten its hands in a death grip, inflicting 1-6
points of damage per round until either it or its victim is killed.
Coffer corpses are unusually strong, and a strength of 20 is
needed to break free of a death grip.

If a coffer corpse is struck by a non-magical weapon for 6 or
more points of damage, it will fall to the ground as if dead, al-
though no real physical damage will occur. Any creature held in
a death grip will fall with it, as the grip is not yet broken. After
one melee round, the coffer corpse will reanimate and continue
to strangle any victim. All those who witness this reanimation
must save vs. spells or flee in terror for 2-8 rounds.

Magical weapons inflict damage on a coffer corpse depending
on their type: Slashing weapons inflict normal damage, but gain
no damage bonuses for strength or enchantment. Bludgeoning
weapons inflict full damage. Piercing weapons inflict half nor-
mal damage, but do not gain magical or strength bonuses.

As it has no mind, a coffer corpse is immune to all spells of the
schools of enchantment/charm and illusion/phantasm.

Coffer corpses are treated as wraiths for the purpose of turn-

ing.

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: As an undead creature which seeks only to
complete its journey from life, the coffer corpse has no social
structure. Its habitat is whatever its burial method supplied.
Any treasure found with it will be an indication of its station in
life—the richer and more powerful it was in life, the more trea-
sure it will have in unlife.

A coffer corpse has one overriding instinctive urge: as it was
denied a complete death, so others shall be denied life. It is bitter
over its incomplete death ritual and seeks to take the lives of
others in revenge, particularly if it can deny its victims the re-
lease of a death ritual. Thus it will often target priests for its
attacks in the hope that there will be no one left to see a proper
burial for its victims.

This bitterness can be used to some advantage, however, if
the means to complete the coffer corpse's death journey can be
determined. If the unfinished death ritual which binds the coffer
corpse to undeath can be completed, the creature will be re-
leased and effectively destroyed. The DM must determine what
constitutes a final death ritual.

Ecology: Coffer corpses have no need for light, air, water, or
food. If they slay a humanoid creature, they ignore the corpse,
leaving it where it lies and not interfering with nonliving scav-
engers, including ghouls and ghasts which come to feed on it.
It will tolerate most undead which do not disturb or attack it,
but will attempt to kill any living creature it encounters near
its unfinal resting place. Intelligent creatures will realize that a
coffer corpse can be a useful rear guard if care is taken to avoid
its lair.

©1997 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved

—,,
 

Dark Creeper

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate/Forest, mountain, subter-
ranean

FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary or clan

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Scavenger

INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)

TREASURE: See below

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1-3

ARMOR CLASS: 2 (10 see below)

MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 1+]

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4 or by weapon

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: S (4' tall)

MORALE: Steady (12)

XP VALUE: 120

Dark creepers care nothing for their appearance; although diffi-
cult to detect by sight, they can sometimes be detected by the
odor of their unwashed bodies and clothing. It is rumored that
they never remove clothing. Instead they add on new layers of
clothing as the layers beneath molder away.

Combat: A dark creeper has the abilities of a 4th level thief and
is well-practiced in moving silently and hiding in shadows. The
average dark creeper will have the following thieving statistics:
PP 15; OL 10; FT 5; MS 70; HS 65; DN 15; CW 60; RL 0.

Dark creepers have the innate ability to create darkness three
times per day, which they will always use when encountered by a
party using any physical illumination. This power extinguishes all
nonmagical sources of light within 50’; these sources cannot then
be relighted for 1 hour. Magical sources have a 50% chance of
being extinguished for 1 hour, and infravision becomes useless.
The darkness can be negated, however, by the subsequent use of
such spells as light and continual light.

Dark creepers suffer no penalties when fighting in the dark
but are more vulnerable when attacked in normal illumination
(AC10). Consequently, a dark creeper will always seek to create
darkness in a combat situation, using its power repeatedly until
expended. Once darkness is achieved, the dark creeper will
move into the party to steal or destroy sources of illumination.
Its second priority is magic, the more powerful and portable the
better. Daggers, rings, and jewelry are particular favorites. Its
innate detect magic ability (15' range) allows it to efficiently find
such items, and it will attempt to take them in the quickest and
easiest way, as many a four-fingered adventurer can attest. A
dark creeper will always fight to the death or flee, understand-
ing neither surrender nor negotiation.

Because of its constant pursuit of small magical items, a dark
creeper will often be found with such treasure. Generally 25% of
its accumulated hoard is hidden in the dark folds and copious
pockets of its filthy and rotting clothing. There is a 15% chance
that this will include a magical dagger, a 40% chance of 1-4 gems
or 1-2 items of jewelry, and a 5% chance of a magical ring. Lair
treasure will generally be four times that carried, plus 1-100 plati-
num pieces and 5-500 gold pieces for each creeper in the lair.

When killed, the dark creeper spontaneously explodes in a
flash of white-hot flame, blinding all creatures facing it within

 

 

10’ for 1-6 turns unless a saving throw is made vs. magic. The
dark creeper’s remains and all nonmetallic and nonmagical
items turn to ash. Metal has an 80% chance of surviving un-
damaged, while magical items, metal or otherwise, must save
vs. magical fire or lose their dweomer. This self-immolation ne-
cessitates a morale check for each remaining dark creeper. Fail-
ure Causes a dark creeper to flee for its life, Illusionary or other
simulated death-fires may be similarly effective against those
dark creepers which fail to save against the illusion.

Habitat/Society: Little is known of the habits and social organi-
zation of the dark creepers, Their language is incomprehensible
to linguists. They live in villages of 20 to 80, deep underground
and shrouded in constant darkness. It is not uncommon for the
approaches to the villages to be littered with traps, pits, and
deadfalls. The villages are generally centered around a pit or
crude stairway that leads to lower levels of the subterranean ca-
verns in which they dwell, and can be used as a means of rapid
escape. Because the village is cloaked in darkness, this pit
presents a significant danger to reckless adventurers who charge
into the village. Small magical items have been found along the
rim of the pit or hole, leading some to believe that the dark
creepers use their innate detect magic ability to place and locate
path markers.

Ecology: It is difficult to imagine what the creepers eat, Some
believe that they subsist on minerals (sulphur, oil, or potassi-
um). Others believe that they subsist on stolen magic, suggest-
ing that magical items gradually lose their dweomer when in the
possession of the dark creepers.

Dark Stalkers: These are the ruling elite of the dark creepers.
They are man-sized and almost always encountered with 25 or
more dark creepers. Dark stalkers are feared and obeyed by
dark creepers and often direct the attacks of dark creepers dur-
ing a large-scale battle.
 

Dark Stalker

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate/ Subterranean
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Leader (see below)
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Scavenger
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: See below
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral
NO. APPEARING: ]

ARMOR CLASS: 2 (10 see below)
MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 2+1

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6 (Weapon)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: | Nil

SIZE: M (6’ tall)
MORALE: Steady (12)

XP VALUE: 175

Dark stalkers are the rarely-seen leaders of the dark creepers.
They direct the movements and actions of their diminutive
cousins, who obey them unerringly and without hesitation.

Dark stalkers are instantly noticeable in a group of dark
creepers, as they are man-sized and stand head and shoulders
above their underlings. Pale and gaunt, with long, angular fea-
tures, they dress primarily in dark hoods, capes, shirts and leg-
gings, with ill-fitting and presumably stolen boots.

Combat: Dark stalkers preter short swords, generally dipped in
dark liquid to prevent any glint of reflected light. There is a 10%
chance that the substance adhering to a dark stalker’s sword will
be poisonous or infectious. [f such is the case and a saving throw
against poison is unsuccessful, the poison or infection will do 1-
4 hit points of additional damage, plus 1-4 additional points
each round thereafter until slowed or cured.

Dark stalkers have the same create darkness ability as dark
creepers, plus the ability to create a wall of fog twice per day.
When confronted with a combat situation, they will use their
wall of fog to complement the darkness being generated by their
minions, but will usually reserve their second wall of fog and
their own create darkness abilities for escape in the event of im-
minent defeat. They are, of course, not hindered by the dark-
ness or the fog. They fight primarily through the dark creepers
under their control, directing movements and attacks by utter-
ing guttural snarls in their incomprehensible language. They
show no compassion for the forces they command in battle, of-
ten directing entire segments of the dark creepers into suicide
attacks, or sacrificing the whole number they direct in order to
effect their own escape. If forced to fight, they will first attempt
to escape by use of their create darkness and wall of fog abilities,
as they too are only AC 10 if attacked in normal illumination. If
unsuccessful, they will wield their short sword, which has a
25% chance of being magical. All of their treasure is carried on
their person, with there being a 12% chance of 2-5 gems or 1-2
items of jewelry and a 7% chance of a magical ring on any indi-
vidual, Chances of treasure recovery are lessened, however, by

 

 

 

the fact that, upon death, dark stalkers explode in a blinding
flash equal to, and with the same effect on carried items as, a3
Hit Dice fireball, Of course, both PCs and NPCs within the area
of effect of the fireball may sustain normal damage from it, and
flammable objects may also be set alight by the effect of the
flash. Some dark creepers have been seen to flee from battle to
escape this effect should it be apparent that their leader is mor-
tally wounded,

Habitat/Society: Stalkers will very rarely be encountered on
their own. There is generally one dark stalker to every 25 dark
creepers and each dark creeper village will contain at least one
stalker ruler. Stalkers have never been seen to work or do any
sort of manual labor. Instead, they stand impassively, directing
the activities of dark creepers, while other creepers attend to
their needs. The stalkers appear to be ruthless and vicious mas-
ters, Dark creepers have been seen to offer up their magical
items to a dark stalker. Whether this is done as a matter of wor-
shipful obeisance, or is an outright bribe, is unclear.

Ecology: Less is known of the ecology of dark stalkers than is
known of dark creepers. Some believe that the dark stalkers are
merely a superior strain of dark creepers who lead and control
the others by birthright, much as a queen bee is similar to the
worker bees and controls their activities.

All dark stalkers encountered to date have been adult males
so far as is known. Perhaps the females and young are secreted
in safe areas yet deeper underground. Or perhaps dark stalkers
are biological or magical transformations of dark creepers, cre-
ated when the current dark stalker leader of a clan of dark creep-
ers expires, with such transformation triggered by the light and
heat signal of the dark stalker’s death scene.

Dark Creeper: This creature has similar, though somewhat
lesser, powers than a dark stalker and appears to regard the
stalkers as leaders or masters. Around 25 of these will generally
be found for each dark stalker.

©1992 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Darter

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: — ‘Temperate or tropical swamp
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Nest
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Blood
INTELLIGENCE: Animal (1)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 2-24
ARMOR CLASS: 8
MOVEMENT: 3

HIT DICE: 1

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-2
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Paralyzation
SPECIAL DEFENSES: _ Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: | Nil

SIZE: T (1'-2' long plus tail)
MORALE: Elite (16)

XP VALUE: 120

Darters are small lizards with tubular snouts. The snouts are at-
tached to tapered heads, from which two dark eyes protrude.
Their bodies are rather pear-shaped, adding to the somewhat
comical appearance of the creatures. Their heads are topped by
short crests which stand erect whenever the lizards are alarmed.
Their scaly skin ranges in color from brilliant emerald to dark
jade, They have three short claws on each of their four feet. The
tail of the darter is as long as its body.

Despite its name, the darter is an extremely lazy creature,
generally moving only to feed.

Combat: The darter is ineffective in close combat, but possesses
a dangerous missile weapon. Numerous slender fangs grow
lengthwise in its tubular snout. At will, the creature can cause
one of these fangs to loosen, and then may fire it as a natural
dart. As the dart passes through the snout, a poison coats it.
Any victim struck by such a dart must save vs. poison or be
paralyzed for 4d4 rounds. The effective range of these darts is
only 10’. Darts may actually travel farther, but they lose the
ability to penetrate skin after traveling more than 10'. A darter’s
fangs grow fairly rapidly, and it can fire 1-6 of them per day.

After a victim has been immobilized by a poisoned dart, any
darters in the area cautiously approach to feast. They use their
weak front claws to make a hole in any exposed skin of the vic-
tim, causing one hit point of damage. Then, using their snouts
to create a powerful suction, they suck blood from the victim,
with each darter causing an additional 1dé6 hit points of damage.
The darter is satiated by one such drink from its prey, and will
not need to feed for another day.

The darter’s high morale score is not a reflection of its cour-
age. Rather, it indicates that they are simply too lazy (and stu-
pid) to run away, even if threatened.

Darters are easily startled, and will fire their darts at practi-
cally anything that moves within range. Fortunately for the lit-
tle lizards, they are immune to the effects of the paralyzing
poison,

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Darters are peaceful creatures, attacking only
those creatures which stumble into their territory. They cluster
around the area where they were hatched. Darters mate once a
year in the spring. The lethargic lizards show very little enthusi-
asm, and sages agree that they have one of the most boring court-
ship rituals in the Realms, In any case, about three weeks after
mating, the female darter produces 1-6 eggs, laying them in a
rough nest wherever she happens to be at the time. The eggs hatch
in two weeks, and baby darters crawl forth into the world.

Ecology: The darter rarely hunts, preferring to wait for food to
come to it. Only when faced with starvation will they move
from their home territory to track food,

Darters serve as prey for many swamp predators, though on-
ly very hungry creatures will risk being hit by their darts and
drained of blood.

Primitive swamp tribes, especially lizard men, often make use
of the creatures. Once a darter is killed, it is fairly easy to re-
move the 1-6 darts in its snout. The darts are about two inches
long, and are straight enough to be used in blowguns, or as tips
for larger darts. The poison sacs are also easy to remove, and if
carefully handled, will produce enough of the paralytic poison
for 6-36 darts. The poison gradually becomes ineffective after
exposure to the air. Victims’ saving throws are made at +1 per
day of the poison's exposure to the air. The poison becomes
completely ineffective after a week of exposure.

Some primitive tribes actually use darters as guards, though
the creatures have proved resistant to all attempts at training,
and are as likely to attack their master as any intruder. Smarter
tribes leave several of the lizards around their sacred areas as a
trap.

Some swamp-dwellers are brave (or foolish) enough to carry
the darters, pointing their snouts towards enemies and causing
the creatures to fire a dart, Unless the bearer is cautious, how-
ever, his living dart gun will fire on him whenever he makes a
sudden move.
 

Denzelian

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any subterranean
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Rock
INTELLIGENCE: Semi- (2-4)
TREASURE:

ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1-2

ARMOR CLASS: 0

MOVEMENT: 3, Or 12

HIT DICE: 6

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 —_
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 5-20

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: L. (10' diameter)
MORALE: Average (8-10)
XP VALUE: 420

 

A denzelian is a large, flat being, normally about 10' in diameter
and 6” thick. It appears to be composed of smooth stone, but its
thick skin is somewhat flexible, allowing it to squeeze through
tight places and to travel up and down inclines. A denzelian
may be of practically any color, depending upon the minerals it
absorbs. Though browns and grays are most common, brilliant
red or yellow denzelians have been seen.

Denzelians have no features. They seem to have a rudimenta-
ry form of language, consisting of vibrations sent through the
rock. No member of any other species has been able to master
this form of communication, though some denzelians may be
trained to respond to taps on their surface.

Combat: These rock-eaters are normally peaceful and non-
aggressive. They will fight back if attacked, at least briefly, and
they will go to great lengths to drive off or kill anyone who
threatens their young. They can sense the vibrations caused by
movement and keep track of intruders in this manner. Denze-
lians secrete acid from their entire surfaces, normally using the
acid to burrow through rock and break it down so it can be eat-
en. If it is frightened, a denzelian can greatly increase the
amount of acid it produces, allowing it to escape by sinking into
the rock, leaving a crumbly, blackish, sandlike residue behind.

It it wishes to attack, the denzelian rushes towards its enemy
at twice its normal movement rate, and attempts to trip the vic-
tim, causing him/her to fall on top of the denzelian and take 5-
20 points of damage from the acid. A saving throw vs. breath
weapon is allowed for half damage: if this fails, the victim's
equipment and clothing may be affected as well.

A denzelian may also attack by burrowing through the rock
until it is above its enemies, and then dropping on them. The
creature is quite heavy, weighing almost 1,000 pounds, Any
caught underneath it take 4-24 points of damage. A successtul
saving throw vs. paralyzation is needed to avoid the falling den-
zelian. Those caught under it automatically take acid damage in
the next round, and in every subsequent round until the denze-
lian moves, is removed, or dies. Since the denzelian is somewhat
flexible, victims will not be without air. Creatures in the area of
such a fall may also be affected by the sandy residue which falls
through the hole created by the denzelian. This gritty substance
fills the air, getting into the eyes, mouths, and noses of nearby
creatures, Anyone within 10’ of the falling denzelian must save

Bn oes

 

 

 

vs. paralyzation or be at —2 to their attack rolls for 2-5 rounds,
or until the substance is washed away.

Habitat/Society: Denzelians normally inhabit areas far away
from civilization, travelling through the rock to find choice min-
eral deposits. Many minerals are absorbed through a denzelian’s
skin after its acid breaks them down sufficiently. However, den-
zelians do not like metals. Metal ores are often uncovered and
left along the meandering trails created by the denzelian.

Denzelians seem to have genders, though no sage has ever de-
termined how to tell them apart. Mating takes place only once
in a decade, whenever two denzelian of the opposite sex meet,
apparently at random, About a year later, the female lays 3-12
gemlike eggs, depositing them hundreds of yards apart over the
course of a month. The eggs are quite beautiful. A denzelian egg
is a fist-sized, faceted gem which looks much like smoky quartz.
In the center of the gem is a milky, grayish liquid, the embryo of
the new denzelian. If the egg is not moved too roughly, which
will destroy the embryo, a baby denzelian will hatch in about a
year. During this time, the mother stays near enough to the eggs
to sense if anyone approaches.

Ecology: Denzelians do not eat animals or plants. They smell
repulsive and are indigestible by animals and plants.

A denzelian egg can bring up to 1,000 gp from a collector.
Still-viable eggs might bring the same amount from wealthy
mine-owners. Just-hatched denzelians can be trained to seek out
certain ores, but they are often very stubborn once they find a
deposit to their liking.

Denzelian body parts may be worth a great deal to an alche-
mist, particularly if any of the acid-secreting glands are still in-
tact. The body is composed of a very rich mix of minerals, and
includes deposits of almost pure carbon, sulfur, magnesium,
and more. Some of these deposits are formed into gemstones,
and it is not unusual to find perfectly round diamonds inside the
body of a denzelian.

£1992 TSA, Inc. All Rights Reserved
 

Dragon, Gem

MC14

 

 

For your convenience, information from previous Monstrous
Compendiums is repeated here. Except where otherwise noted,
the neutral or gem dragons conform in all respects to other drag-
on species.

Like other dragons, the neutral or gem dragons are winged
reptilian beings known and feared for their physical prowess
and magical abilities. Gem dragons tend to be smaller and slow-
er than dragons of other species, but have other abilities to com-
pensate. They are just as dangerous as other dragons.

At first glance, gem dragons may be mistaken for other similar-
ly colored species: crystal for white, topaz for yellow, emerald for
green, etc. The environments where they are encountered should
indicate otherwise, and when gem dragons are seen in bright
light, their sparkling hides easily identify them.

Gem dragons are very charismatic and suave. They delight in
riddling talk and are masters of persuasion, using their magic
and psionics as well as their natural charisma.

Like other subspecies, neutral dragons, especially older ones,
are primarily solitary. Generally, when multiple dragons are en-
countered, it will be a mated pair and young.

Gem dragons are believed to have come from the same roots
as other dragons. Present subspecies tend to keep to themselves,
working together only when threatened. Emerald and sapphire
dragons have been known to cooperate for mutual protection.
Various neutral dragons may associate (very rarely) with good
or evil dragons which are close in alignment.

Neutral dragons are as covetous as other dragons, and like to
build up huge treasure hoards which they rest upon, Great
wyrms often have gems and coins embedded in their hides.

Neutral dragons are fearsome predators, scavenging when
necessary. They have very efficient metabolisms which can
make use of practically anything the dragon eats. All gem drag-
ons subsist at least partially on inorganic material, particularly
the appropriate type of gems.

Dragon Hit Die Modifier: Dragons’ Hit Dice vary between sub-
species and are modified based on age category. Refer to indi-
vidual dragons for base Hit Die information, but the modifier is
listed on the overall dragon chart.

Dragon Combat Modifier: Combat modifiers vary with age cat-
egory. The bonus applies to damage rolls for each physical at-
tack, but not for a dragon's breath weapon.

Dragon Attacks: Dragons have a claw/claw/bite attack form
and a breath weapon. A dragon can use its breath weapon once
every three combat rounds, Gem dragons also employ special
attack forms, such as snatch, kick, wing buffet, tail slap, plum-
met, and stall, if their age and prevailing conditions allow it.

Spells: Most gem dragons seek to learn specific spells over the
years. Wizard spells tend to come from the enchantment/charm
school, and blink is very popular. Priest spells are usually cho-
sen from the following spheres: all, animal, divination, elemen-
tal, healing, plant, and weather. Each spell can be used once per

day. All dragons’ spells are innate and triggered by concentrat-
ing for one segment. Dragons do not possess spell books, nor do
they pray to deities for spells.

Psionics: In general, gem dragons are wiser and more intelligent
than other dragons. If psionics are used in the campaign, all gem
dragons are psionic from the time they hatch. They very seldom
learn disciplines, sciences, or devotions other than those given.
If psionics are used, add to experience point values as follows:
Crystal and topaz dragons: hatchlings are worth 2,000 xp. Add
1,000 xp to the value given for any other age category.
Emerald and sapphire dragons: hatchlings are worth 3,000 xp.
Add 2,000 xp to the value given for any other age category.
Amethyst dragons: hatchlings are worth 6,000 xp. Add 3,000 xp
to the value given for any other age category.

Dragon Defenses: A dragon’s Armor Class improves as it gets
older because the dragon's hide and general constitution become
tougher. Old or older dragons are immune to normal missiles,
though large or magical missiles affect them normally. Dragons
are resistant to magic, as noted in each individual description.

Dragon Senses: All dragons have excellent sight, smell, and
hearing, allowing them to detect invisible or hidden objects or
creatures within 10’ per age level. All dragons possess a natural
clairaudience ability with respect to their lairs. The range is 20'
per age level. The dragon must concentrate on a specific section
of its lair or the surrounding area to hear what is going on.

Some dragons are able to communicate telepathically with
any intelligent creature. See individual descriptions for percent-
age chances.

Dragon Fear; Gem dragons are not as inherently fearsome as
other dragons. The sight of a young adult or older gem dragon
still causes panic and fear, and the size of the fear aura is the
same, but the saving throw modifier is greater.

Dragon Lairs: Even more than other dragons, the gem dragons
make their lairs far from civilization. The amount of wildlife
around a gem dragon's lair is somewhat greater than that
around the lairs of other dragons. All dragons consider visitors
or intruders to be potential threats to their treasure. They keep
treasure well hidden, and will often create hazards to protect it.

Gem Dragon Hide: The hide of neutral dragons is prized by ar-
morers with the skill to turn it into shields and armor. Their
scales, however, are different from those of other dragons, hav-
ing faceted surfaces which reflect light. They tend to be slightly
more brittle than those of other dragons, so armor made from
them requires repair more often. The scales of gem dragons ac-
tually take on properties of real gems, because of the dragons’
diet, and can be valuable to collectors. In addition, the scales of
gem dragons are reputed to have magical properties, or at least
to lend themselves to certain kinds of enchantments.

 

Gem Dragon Table

Category Age (yrs) Hit Die Modifier Combat Modifier Fear Radius Save Modifier
1 Hatchling 0-5 -6 +1 Nil Nil
2 Very Young 6-15 -4 +2 Nil Nil
3 Young 16-25 —2 +3 Nil Nil
4 Juvenile 26-50 Nil +4 Nil Nil
2 Young Adult 51-100 +] +5 LS yards +7
6 Adult 101-200 +2 +6 20 yards +6
7 Mature Adult 201-400 +3 +7 25 yards +5
8 Old 401-600 +4 +8 30 yards +4
9 Very old 601-800 *5 +9 35 yards +3
10 Venerable 801-1,000 +6 +10 40 yards +2
11 Wyrm 1,000-1,200 +7 +11 45 yards +]
12 Great Wyrm 1,200 + +8 +12 50 yards 0
 

Dragon, Amethyst

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate and cold mountain lakes
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary or clan
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Special
INTELLIGENCE: Genius (17-18)
TREASURE: Special
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1 (2-5)
ARMOR CLASS: —4 (base)
MOVEMENT: 12, Fl 40 (C), Sw 12
HIT DICE: 14 (base)
THACO: 8 (base)

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 ( +special)
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-10/1-10/5-30
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Special
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Variable
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Variable

SIZE: G (30' base)
MORALE: Fanatic (17-18)
XP VALUE: Variable

Amethyst dragons are wise and regal, and ignore what they
consider to be petty squabbles between good and evil, law and
chaos. When hatched, they are a light, translucent purple. As
they grow older, the shade of the scales gradually darkens to a
sparkling violet.

Amethyst dragons speak their own tongue and the tongue
common to all gem dragons. Eighteen percent of hatchling ame-
thyst dragons can communicate with any intelligent creature.
This chance increases 5% per age category of the dragon.

Combat: Amethyst dragons prefer talking to fighting as a first
step. If parleying goes badly, an amethyst dragon will attack,
tirst with its breath weapon, then with psionics and spells. They
never hide or attempt ambush.

Breath weapon/special abilities: An amethyst dragon's breath
weapon is a faceted, violet lozenge, which it can spit into the
midst of enemies, up to 75’ away. It explodes with concussive
force, damaging all creatures within 60’ of the impact as indicated
(save vs. breath weapon for half damage). All creatures size huge
and smaller must also save vs. paralyzation or be knocked down.
Any creature in the blast radius has a 50% chance of being
knocked unconscious for one round per age level of the dragon,
plus 1-8 rounds. An amethyst dragon casts spells and uses its
magical abilities at 9th level, plus its combat modifier.

Amethyst dragons are born with an innate water breathing
ability and an immunity to poisons. They are also immune to
force attacks and effects, such as those from beads of force, the
various Bigby's hand spells, and wall of force. As they age, they
gain the following additional powers: Young: water walking six

 

 

 

 

times a day. Juvenile: neutralize poison six times a day. Adult:
shape change, as a druid, into a reptile, bird, or mammal, three
times a day, with each form usable only once per day. Old: Oti-
luke’s resilient sphere three times a day. Very old: reflecting pool
once a day. Venerable: control weather once a day.

Psionics Summary:

Level Dis/Sci/Dev Attack/ Defense Score PSPs

= HD 3/3/5 PB,EW,PsC/ = [nt 250
MBI,TS, TW

Common powers:

® Psychokinesis - Sciences: detonate, project force, telekine-
sis, Devotions:control body, inertial barrier, molecular agita-
tion.

® Psychometabolism - Sciences: complete healing, energy
containment, metamorphosis. Devotions: cell adjustment, ex-
pansion, reduction.

* Telepathy — Sciences:domination, mindlink, mindwipe. De-
votions: contact, ESP. identity penetration, truthear.

* Metapsionics - Sciences: empower, psychic surgery, ul-
trablast. Devotions: magnify, psionic sense, psychic drain.

Habitat/Society: Amethyst dragons live in caves on the shores of
isolated mountain lakes and pools. They are good parents, but
believe their young should fend for themselves as soon as they
become young adults, Amethyst dragons dislike red and white
dragons, and consider silver and copper dragons to be foolish.

Ecology: Amethyst dragons prefer to eat fish and a large num-
ber of gems. They are not inherently enemies with any life form.

 

Age Body Lgt.(’) Tail Lgt.(’) AC Breath Weapon
| 2-10 4-10 ~] 2d8 +1
2 10-18 10-16 —2 4d8 +2
3 18-28 16-26 -3 ode +3
4 28-38 26-36 —4 Bd8 +4
5 38-53 36-46 =F 10d8 +5
6 53-68 46-56 -6 12d8 +6
7 68-80 56-06 sf 14d8 +7
8 80-92 66-76 38 lod8 +8
9 92-102 76-82 -9 18d8 +9
10 102-112 82-85 -10 20d8 +10
11 112-122 88-94 -11 22d8 +11
lz 122-132 94-100 12 24d8 +12

Spells Wizard/Priest MR Treasure Type XP Value
Nil Nil Nil 3,000
Nil Nil Nil 4,000
Nil Nil Nil 6,000
Nil/1 Nil eT 8,000
1/1 25% H, U*2, T 9,000
1/Z1 30% H, U*3, T¥2 11,000
11/211 35% H, Ux4, T*2 12,000
21/2211 40% H, UX6, TX3 14,000
211/22211 45% H, U*8,T x3 16,000
22£11/222211 50% H, U*10, T*4 18,000
ZL2Z210/222221 55% H, UX13,T*4 19,000
2Z2ZI2Z22/2 22222 60% H, UX16, T*5 20,000

©1992 TSA. Inc. All Rights Reserved
Dragon, Crystal

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate and cold mountains
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary or clan
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Special
INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (15-16)
TREASURE: Special
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral
NO, APPEARING: 1 (2-5)

ARMOR CLASS: 0 (base)
MOVEMENT: 9, Fl 24 (C), Jp 3
HIT DICE: 10 (base)
THACO: 11 (base)

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 +special
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6/1-6/2-12
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Special
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Variable
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Variable

SIZE: L (12' base)
MORALE: Fanatic (17-18)
XP VALUE: Variable

Crystal dragons are the friendliest of the gem dragons, always
curious about the world. Though they seldom seek out compa-
ny, they willingly converse with visitors who do not try to steal
from them.

At birth, crystal dragons have glossy white scales. As they
age, their scales become translucent. Moonlight and starlight
cause their scales to appear luminescent and sparkling, while
bright sunlight lends them a dazzling brilliance which makes
crystal dragons almost unbearable to look at in full sun.

Crystal dragons speak their own tongue and the tongue com-
mon to all gem dragons, and 10% of hatchling crystal dragons
can communicate with any intelligent creature. This chance in-
creases 5% per age category of the dragon.

Combat: Crystal dragons greatly preter conversation to combat.
They often use their charm person ability early in any conversa-
tion. They will not initially hide, although if visitors become hos-
tile, a crystal dragon will usually retreat immediately, then
observe its enemies and plan an attack, often using its breath
weapon first, to weaken and disorient enemies. Spells and other
abilities are used as needed, with claws and bite a last resort.

Breath weapon/special abilities: A crystal dragon's breath weap-
on is a cone of glowing shards 60' long, 5’ wide at the dragon's
mouth, and 25’ wide at the base. The shards shine as bright as
daylight, and can be seen for miles. Creatures caught in the blast
may save vs. breath weapon for half damage, and must make a
second save or be blinded by the dazzling shards for one turn per
age level of the dragon. Creatures within 60' must save vs. breath

 

 

 

 

 

weapon or be dazzled, with —2 to attack rolls for one turn per
age level of the dragon. A crystal dragon casts spells and uses its
magical abilities at Sth level, plus its combat modifier.

Crystal dragons are born with an immunity to light-based at-
tacks and normal cold, as well as an innate ability to cast charm
person at will, As they age, they gain the following additional
powers: Juvenile: color spray three times a day. Mature adult:
suggestion three times a day. Very old: luckscale once a day.
This allows the dragon to enchant one of its scales as a Stone of
Good Luck, The enchantment lasts one day per age category of
the dragon. Such scales are given to friendly visitors. Wyrm:
contro! winds three times a day.

Psionics Summary:
Level Dis/Sci/Dev
= HD 1/1/2

Common powers:

* Clairsentience - Sciences: clatraudience, clairvoyance, pre-
cognition, Devotions: any.

PSPs
100

Score
= Int

Attack/Detense
EW/ MBI

Habitat/Society: Crystal dragons prefer cold, open areas with
clear skies, and they enjoy stargazing. They have been known
to build snow forts, to shape snow into beautiful sculptures, and
to throw balls of snow at various targets. They are fun-loving
and mischievous,

Ecology: Crystal dragons prefer gems and metal ores to all other
foods. Though generally friendly, they bear great enmity to-
wards all giants, who sometimes try to enslave them.

 

Age Body Lgt.(’) Tail Lgt.(’) AC Breath Weapon

1 1-4 1-6 3 1d4 +1

Z 4-9 6-11 2 2d4 +2

3 9-14 11-16 l 3d4 +3

4 14-21 16-23 0 4d4 +4

5 21-28 23-30 =I 5d4+5

6 28-38 30-40 "ZL od4 +6

7 38-48 40-50 3 7d4+7

8 48-56 50-60 -4 8d4 +38

9 56-64 60-70 =§ 9d4 +9
10 64-72 70-77 -6 10d4 +10
11 72-80 77-84 —6 lid4+11
12 80-92 84-91 -8 12d4 +12

Spells Wizard/Priest MR Treasure Type XP Value
ner Nil Nil 1,400
Nil Nil Nil 2,000
Nil Nil Nil 3,000
Nil/1 Nil E,Q 5,000
1/1 5% E, OX2, T 6,000
1/11 10%  H,Qx3,T 7,000
iti 15% H, QO*4, T 9,000
11/111 20% H, Q*5, T 10,000
111/211 25% H, O*6, Tx2 12,000
111/2211 30% H,QO*7,T*2 13,000
21 1/22.212 35% H, Q*8, T*2 15,000
Z21/2222 40% H, O*9, T*2 16,000
Dragon, Emerald

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Subtropical and tropical extinct vol-
canoes
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary or clan
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Special
INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (15-16)
TREASURE: Special
ALIGNMENT: Lawful neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1 (2-5)
ARMOR CLASS: —2 (base)
MOVEMENT: 9, F130 (C), Br3
HIT DICE: 12 (base)
THACO: 9 (base)
NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 +special
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-8/1-8/3-18
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Special
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Variable
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Variable
SIZE: H (20’ base)
MORALE: Fanatic (17-18)
XP VALUE: Variable

Emerald dragons are quite curious, particularly about local his-
tory and the customs of other creatures. They are the most para-
noid of the gem dragons, and do not like to have people get too
close to their treasure.

Emerald dragons have translucent green scales at birth. As
they age, their scales harden and take on a variety of shades of
green. They scintillate in the light, and the emerald dragon's
hide seems to be in constant motion.

Emerald dragons speak their own tongue and the tongue com-
mon to all gem dragons, and 14% of hatchling emerald dragons
can communicate with any intelligent creature. This chance in-
creases 5% per age category of the dragon.

Combat: Emerald dragons will usually set up various traps and
alarms around their lairs to warn them of visitors. They often
hide, using psionics and magic to observe, and seldom coming
out to speak. If intruders approach the dragon's treasure or at-
tack, an emerald dragon will often burrow underneath to sur-
prise its victims, then attack with breath weapon and claws,
seeking to disable as many as it can as quickly as it can. If faced
with superior forces, an emerald dragon will retreat and wait
years for revenge if necessary.

Breath weapon/special abilities: An emerald dragon's breath
weapon is a loud, keening wail which sets up a sonic vibration
affecting all creatures within 120’ of the dragon's mouth. All
creatures in the area may save vs. breath weapons for half dam-
age from the painful vibrations. Victims must make a second
saving throw vs. breath weapon or be stunned, and unable to
defend or attack, for three rounds per age level of the dragon,
plus 1-4 rounds. Those whose saves are successful are deafened

 

 

 

 

 

instead, for a like amount of time, and at — 1 to attack. Deafness
will not protect one from the vibratory damage inflicted, but
will prevent stunning or additional deafness. An emerald drag-
on casts spells and uses its magical abilities at 6th level, plus its
combat modifier.

Emerald dragons are born with an innate flame walk ability
and an immunity to sonic attacks. As they age, they gain the
following additional powers: Young: audible glamer three times
a day. Juvenile: hypnotism three times a day. (The hypnotic ef-
fect is actually caused by the skillful rippling movement of the
dragon's scales.) Adult: Melf's minute meteors three times a day.
Mature adult: hold person three times a day. Venerable: animate
rock once a day. Great wyrm: geas once a day.(This is also ac-
complished via the moving scales.)

Psionics Summary:
Level Dis/Sci/Dev
= HD 2/2/3

Common powers:

* Clairsentience - Sciences: aura sight, object reading, pre-
cognition, Devotions: all-around vision, combat mind, danger
sense.

® Telepathy - Sciences: ejection, mindlink, probe. Devotions:
contact, ESP. life detection, sight link, sound link.

Score PSPs
=Int 180

Attack /Defense
PB,II/MBI, TW

Habitat/Society: Emerald dragons are very reclusive, lairing in
the cones of extinct or seldom active volcanoes. Although they
will sometimes live near sapphire dragons, they live in fear of
the voracious greed of red dragons.

Ecology: Emerald dragons will eat anything, but prefer lizards
and giants. They are actively hostile towards fire giants.

 

Age Body Lgt.(’) Tail Lgt.(') AC Breath Weapon
1 3-9 2-7 1 2d4 +1
2 9-18 7-14 0 4d4+2
3 18-27 14-21 4 6d4 +3
4 27-36 21-28 = 8d4 +4
5 36-45 28-35 oa 10d4 +5
6 45-54 35-42 —4 1lad4+6
7 54-63 42-49 a 14d4 +7
8 63-72 49-56 -6 16d4 +8
9 72-81 56-63 = 18d4 +9
10 81-90 63-70 -8 20d4 +10
11 90-99 70-77 -9 22d4 +11
12 99-108 77-84 -10 24d4 +12

Spells Wizard/Priest MR Treasure Type XP Value
Nil Nil Nil 1,400
Nil Nil Nil 2,000
Nil Nil Nil 4,000
1 Nil VW2H, QX2 6,000
1/1 15% H, Q*4, T 7,000
11/1 20% H, Qx6,T 9,000
11/11 25% H, Q*8, T*2 11,000
111/21 30% H, Q*10, TX2 12,000
211/211 35% HX2,Q*12,TX2 13,000
221/221 40% H*2,Q*14,T*3 15,000
2211/2211 45% HX*2,Q*16,Tx3 16,000
2Z22111/2221 50% H*2,Q*18, TX3 18,000

©1992 TSA. Inc. All Rights Reserved
 

Dragon, Sapphire

MC14

 

 

~~ CLIMATE/TERRAIN:

Any subterranean

 

 

 

 

 

 

FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary or clan
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Special
INTELLIGENCE: Genius (17-18)
TREASURE: Special
ALIGNMENT: Lawful neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1 (2-5)

ARMOR CLASS: —3 (base)
MOVEMENT: 9, Fl 30 (C), Bré
HIT DICE: 13 (base)
THACO: 7 (base)

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3+special
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-8/1-8/5-20 (3d6 +2)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Special

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Variable
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Variable

SIZE: H (24' base)
MORALE: Fanatic (17-18)
XP VALUE: Variable

While not actively hostile, sapphire dragons are militantly terri-
torial and initially distrustful of anyone who approaches them.

These beautiful dragons range from light to dark blue, and
sparkle in the light, even at birth. Sapphire dragons are often
mistaken for blue dragons, unless someone recalls the latter's
preferred arid environment.

Sapphire dragons speak their own tongue and the tongue
common to all gem dragons, and 16% of hatchling sapphire
dragons can communicate with any intelligent creature. This
chance increases 5% per age category of the dragon.

Combat: Sapphire dragons generally try to observe intruders
before deciding what to do with them, unless known enemies,
such as drow or dwarves, are present, or the intruders are ac-
tively hostile. If the dragon or its treasure is threatened, it be-
comes violent immediately, using its breath weapon, spells, and
physical attacks to drive intruders away.

Breath weapor/special abilities: A sapphire dragon's breath
weapon is a cone of high-pitched, almost inaudible sound, 75’
long, 5’ wide at the dragon's mouth, and 25' wide at the base.
Creatures caught by the blast may save vs. breath weapon for
half damage from disruption caused by the sound. In addition,
victims must save vs, breath weapon or be affected by fear, flee-
ing in panic for two rounds per age level of the dragon, plus 1-6
rounds, Deafness will not protect one from the breath weapon's
damage, though it will prevent fear effects. A sapphire dragon
casts spells and uses its magical abilities at 7th level, plus its com-

  
 

dso Ns

an

 

 

 

bat modifier.

Sapphire dragons are born with immunity to all forms of fear,
as well as immunity to web, hold, slow, and paralysis. As they
age, they gain the following additional powers: Young: contin-
ual light three times a day. Juvenile: stone shape three times a
day. Adult: anti-magic shell once a day. Mature adult: passwall
six times a day. Venerable: wall of stone three times a day. Great
wyrm: sunray three times a day.

Psionics Summary:
Level Dis/Sci/Dev
= HD 2/2/4

Common powers:

® Clairsentience - Sciences: clairaudience, clairvoyance. De-
votions: know direction, radial navigation.

® Psychokinesis - Sciences: disintegrate, molecular rear-
rangement, telekinesis. Devotions: animate shadow, control
light, molecular manipulation, soften.

e Psychoportation - Sciences: any. Devotions: any.

Attack/ Defense Score PSPs
PB,EW/MBI, IF = Int 200

Habitat/Society: Sapphire dragons lair deep underground and
prefer to place their treasure in caverns accessible only through
magic or psionics. They will sometimes share territory (but not
treasure) with emerald dragons.

Ecology: Sapphire dragons consider giant spiders a great deli-
cacy and often hunt them. Drow, dwarves, mind flayers, and
aboleth are great enemies of sapphire dragons.

 

Age Body Lgt.(') Tail Lgt.(’) AC Breath Weapon
] 4-10 2-5 0 2d6 +1
Z 10-20 5-10 =] 4d6 +2
3-20-30 10-15 2 6d6 +3
4 30-40 15-20 —3 8d6 +4
5 40-50 20-25 -4 10d6 +5
6 50-60 25-30 =5 12d6 +6
7 60-70 30-35 -6 14d6 +7
8 70-80 35-40 -7 16d6 +8
9 80-90 40-45 -8 18d6 +9
10 90-100 45-50 = 20d6 +10
1] 100-110 50-55 -10 22d6 +11
12 110-130 55-65 -11 24d6 +12

a Wizard/Priest MR Treasure Type XP Value
il Nil Nil 1,400
Nil Nil Nil 2,000
Nil Nil Nil 4,000
Nil/1 Nil H,Q*2 6,000
1/1 20%  H,Qx4,T 7,000
1/11 25% H, Q*6, T 9,000
11/11 30% H, Ox8, Tx2 11,000
21/21 35% HxX2,Q*10, Tx2 12,000
211/211 40% H*2,Q*13,T*3 13,000
221/2211 45% HX2,Q*16,T*3 15,000
2211/22211 50% H*2,Q*20,T*4 16,000
2221/22222 35% H*2,Q*24,T*4 18,000
 

Dragon, Topaz

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate and cold seacoast
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary or clan
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Special
INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (15-16)
TREASURE: Special
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1 (2-5)

ARMOR CLASS: —1 (base)
MOVEMENT: 9, Fl24(C), Sw 9
HIT DICE: 11 (base)
THACO: 9 (base)

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3+ special
DAMAGE/ATTACK: __2-7/2-7/2-16
SPECIAL ATTACKS: _ Special

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Variable

MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Variable

SIZE: H (15' base)
MORALE: Elite (15-16)

XP VALUE: Variable

Topaz dragons are unfriendly and selfish. They are seldom
pleasant to deal with because of their erratic behavior. Topaz
dragons neither seek company nor welcome it,

At hatching, topaz dragons are a dull yellow-orange in color.
As they age and their scales harden, the scales become translu-
cent and faceted. Adult topaz dragons sparkle in full sunlight.

Topaz dragons speak their own tongue and the tongue com-
mon to all gem dragons, and 12% of hatchling topaz dragons
can communicate with any intelligent creature. This chance in-
creases 5% per age category of the dragon.

Combat: Though topaz dragons dislike intruders, they will of-
ten use conversation as a cover for psionics or magic use. If the
intruders become hostile, or if the topaz dragon tires of them, it
will attack, psionically first, if possible. Topaz dragons will usu-
ally save their breath weapon until they are wounded. A topaz
dragon will pretend to surrender to win some time, and will re-
treat if greatly threatened. It will usually make one or more false
retreats, attempting to come back and attack with surprise.

Breath weapon/special abilities: The topaz dragon's breath weap-
on is a cone of dehydration, 70’ long, 5’ wide at the dragon's
mouth, and 25' wide at the base. When directed against liquids, a
cubic foot of water is dried up per point of damage. Creatures
caught by the cone may make a saving throw vs. breath weapon
for half damage from water loss. In addition, those who fail to
save lose 7-12 Strength points; those who do not fail lose only 1-6
Strength points. Curative spells less powerful than a heal or re-
generation are ineffective against Strength loss, though victims

 

 

 

 

who are carefully nursed back to health will recover one Strength
point per day. Any creature reduced to a Strength of zero or less
dies instantly. A topaz dragon casts spells and uses its magical
abilities at 5th level, plus its combat modifier.

Topaz dragons are born with an innate water breathing ability
and an immunity to cold. As they age, they gain the following
additional powers: Young: protection from evil or good three
times a day. Juvenile: blink three times a day. Adult: wall of fog
three times a day. Mature adult: airy water three times a day ina
10’ radius per age category of the dragon. Old; part water once
a day.

Psionics Summary:
Level Dis/Sci/Dev
= HD 1/1/3

Common powers:

e Psychokinesis - Sciences: telekinesis. Devotions: animate
object, control wind, molecular manipulation, soften.

* Psychometabolism - Sciences: energy containment, life
draining, metamorphosis, Devotions: biofeedback, body equi-
librium, cause decay, chemical simulation.

Score PSPs
=Int 120

Attack / Defense
MT. 1II/MBI,MB

Habitat/Society: Topaz dragons lair near the sea, often building
or claiming caves near the waterline. Such caves are always kept
absolutely dry. These dragons enjoy sunning on outcroppings.

Ecology: Topaz dragons preter to eat fish and other aquatic crea-
tures, especially giant squid.

 

Age Body Lgt.(’) Tail Lgt.(’) AC Breath Weapon

] 2-9 2-5 2 1d6 +1

2 9-16 5-9 I 2d6 +2

3 16-23 9-13 Q 3d6+3

4 23-35 13-17 ec | 4d6+4

5 35-44 17-23 —Z 5d6+5

6 44-53 23-29 =3 bdé +6

7 53-59 29-33 —4 7d6+7

& 59-65 33-37 =o 8dé6+8

9 65-70 37-41 -6 9d6+9
10 70-75 41-45 =F 10d6 +10
1] 75-80 45-48 “8 lid6é+11
12 80-92 48-50 =9 l2d6 +12

oe Wizard/Priest MR Treasure Type XP Value
il Nil Nil 1,400
Nil Nil Nil 2,000
Nil Nil Nil 4,000
Nil/1 Nil E, 6,000
1/1 10% H,Qx3,T 7,000
l/l] 15% H, O*5, T 9,000
1/21 20% H, Ox7,T 11,000
11/211 25% H, Ox9, Tx2 13,000
111/221 30% H, O11, TX2 14,000
211/2211 35% H, O*13,T *2 15,000
22 1/222)1 40% H*2,Q*15, TX3 16,000
2211/2222 45% H*2,Q*17, T*3 17,000

©1992 TSA, Inc Al Fights Reserved
y— CLIMATE/TERRAIN:

Dune Stalker

MC14

 

 

Tropical / Desert

 

 

FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Unknown
INTELLIGENCE: Highly (13-14)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Evil

 

NO, APPEARING: 1

 

 

ARMOR CLASS: 3

MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 6

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-12

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Kiss of death (see below)

 

SPECIAL DEFENSES: = Can only be hit by magical weapons
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 30%

SIZE: M (7' tall)

MORALE: Very steady (14)

XP VALUE: 2,000

Vile in both their nature and in their appearance, dune stalkers
shun the Prime Material Plane, unless summoned by a high-
level evil magician to fulfill an evil quest. The dune stalker will
attack good whenever it appears and attempt to deliver its bi-
zarre and fatal “kiss of death” (see below).

The dune stalker appears as a tall, gaunt, and naked human-
oid, with an unusually large, ovoid-shaped head, extremely
long arms and legs, and razor-sharp claws on its hands and feet.
The skin is reddish-orange in hue and extremely dry and abra-
sive to the touch. The eyes are large, and the nose is narrow and
long. The chest is abnormally broad at the top, narrowing uni-
formly to a relatively tiny waist. There is no hair whatsoever on
the creature. It does not sweat.

Combat: The dune stalker's principal ranged attack is by sonic
vibration. The dune stalker's broad chest apparently allows it to
take in a huge quantity of dry, hot air, which is then forced out
under tremendous pressure through a resonance chamber in the
nasal passages. This sonic vibration has a range of 60' in a cone
extending from the mouth, and expands to 10’ in diameter at the
extreme end of its range. The vibration causes 2-12 points of
damage to each person within the cone, and causes temporary
deafness for 1-10 rounds. No saving throw is permitted. Those
outside the cone of effect will hear an eerie, nasal roar.

At close range, the dune stalker will attempt to deliver a “kiss
of death” to whichever target within melee range is most identifi-
able as good. This is accomplished when the dune stalker places
its lips in direct contact with the bare skin of its victim, and makes
a sonic vibration attack. The sonic vibrations set up by the “kiss
of death” are of such intensity that failure to make a successful
saving throw vs. death means instant death. A successful saving
throw renders the victim unconscious for one melee round. In a
“kiss of death,” the attack has no other area of effect, although
those nearby will still hear a muted trumpeting roar.

Dune stalkers have 30% magic resistance, and are only
harmed by magical weapons. If attacked by a group, only some
of which have magical weapons, the dune stalker will move first
to attack those with magical weapons, particularly if they are of
good alignment.

Habitat/Society:The dune stalker is a faultless tracker, with the
same abilities in this regard as an invisible stalker, most particu-

 

Bea " as,
*, SSS

 

 

 

 

 

larly the ability to detect any trail less than a day old. Summon-
ed from the Para-Elemental Plane of Magma by a high-level evil
magician, its quest on the Prime Material Plane may be general
or specific. Only once the quest is completed does the dune
stalker return to its own plane. Accordingly, dune stalkers are
relentless and unmerciful in the pursuit of their assigned quest.
As the literal terms of their quest are what binds them to the
Prime Material Plane, they seek literal compliance and will be
released from their quest if such is achieved, even if the intent of
the quest remains unfulfilled—much as in the case of interpreta-
tion of a wish or limited wish spell. Similarly, even though they
may accomplish the intent of their summoner, unless the literal
terms of the quest are met, they will remain bound to the Prime
Material Plane, roaming the desolate desert areas seeking vio-
lent release of the anger within them. In addition, throughout
their existence on this plane, dune stalkers will always attack
good should it be encountered in any form or combination.

Dune stalkers are solitary creatures when encountered on the
Prime Material Plane, There is no evidence of an ability to plane
shift without the summons of a high-level evil magician.

Little is known of dune stalkers on their own plane. It is clear
to all who encounter them on the Prime Material Plane that they
are desperately unhappy during their unrequested stay. They
loathe coolness and moisture of any kind. Dune stalkers fre-
quent only desert areas, and move with their greatest ease only
during the hottest part of the day. It is also possible that they
cannot hear sounds in the range of human hearing.

Ecology: The bones of a dune stalker are very strong, and made
up of many hollow tubes, spiraling around one another to form
an extremely strong bundle. This makes the bones almost im-
possible to work. The hide of a dune stalker is too abrasive to
make a desirable leather for garments and the like, but does per-
form admirably as an abrasive sandpaper, highly favored by
skilled woodworkers because of its durability.
Falcon, Fire

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any desert, mountain or tundra

FREQUENCY: Uncommon

ORGANIZATION: Family

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Carnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Animal (1)

TREASURE: QO

ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 2-6

ARMOR CLASS: 4

MOVEMENT: 3, Fl 36 (C)

HIT DICE: 1

THACO: 20

NO. OF ATTACKS: 5

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-3/1-3/1-2/1-2/1-2

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Fire

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Immune to fire-based attacks

MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: S (2'6” wingspan, 8” body)

MORALE: Steady (11), Fanatic (18) when
guarding young

XP VALUE: 270

The fire falcon is a small russet-colored raptor, found in areas
well away from those settled by man. It seeks only to be left in
peace by large creatures, including man.

Combat: Fire falcons determine their tactics in combat depend-
ing on the size of their opponent. Normal prey, such as rabbits
and small birds, are simply grabbed in their talons and attacked
with the beak. Larger creatures, like men or horses, are gener-
ally attacked first at long range, in an attempt to drive them off.
The ranged attack of a fire falcon is to discharge two highly
flammable spheres from its wingtips in the general area of the
intruder. These explode on contact with anything, doing 1-6
points of damage (no save, but magical fire resistance halves the
damage) to all in a 10’ radius. Thus, it is not necessary for the
fire falcon to make a successful attack roll in order to damage a
party. Each fire falcon can make this attack four times per day. If
the sphere actually hits an adventurer, or their mount, the burn-
ing substance sticks to them, doing an additional 1-6 points of
damage in the next round, and 1-3 the round after that, before
going out.

Only if it cannot drive off the intruders will the fire falcon
attack physically. Even then, it will only attack if there are
young in the nest and the intruders are approaching. If it must
use physical means, it will attack first with the talons, which
rake for 1-3 points of damage each. This is followed by a beak
attack, for 1-2 points of damage, and buffeting from the crea-
ture's wings, which causes a further 1-2 points of damage per
wing. In addition, any mounted opponent which is buffeted
must make a Dexterity check with a — 4 penalty or fall from his/
her mount. This can be fatal if the mount is airborne. The fire
falcon’s talon attacks will be directed at the face or hair of its
target, so armor will not help unless a full face helmet is being
worn. Mounted targets get no Dexterity bonus to their Armor
Class during these attacks. The fire falcon will pick a target with
long, flowing hair in preference to one fully clad in metal. Fire
falcons cannot be harmed by any form of fire, magical or other-
wise. They are also immune to magic missile.

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Fire falcons tend to form small flocks of 3 or 4
families. They build their nests high up on mountains if possi-
ble, or else well hidden among tufts of tundra grass. When en-
countered in deserts, they will always have their nest in a
nearby mesa. Fire falcons like to line their nests with shiny ob-
jects, and that is where any treasure they have will be found.
The normal food for a fire falcon is small rodents, and they con-
sume about half their body weight each day in mice, rabbits,
shrews, and other such creatures. The normal flight range of a
fire falcon is up to forty miles in a single day. Fire falcons can
soar on thermals for hours without moving their wings, and can
see a fieldmouse moving from 4 miles away.

While their normal flying speed is around 12 miles per hour,
fire falcons can reach speeds in excess of 130 miles per hour in a
dive on their prey.

The normal lifespan of a fire falcon is 28 years. For the first six
months of its life, it will remain in the nest, being fed by its par-
ents. After this time, it is taught to fly and to hunt, and to be-
come a contributing member of the flock.

Fire falcons only lay one, or rarely two, eggs in a season.
They are only able to breed from the age of 3 years until 27
years. All the birds in a flock will protect the young, whether
their own or another pair's.

Fire falcons mate for life. To avoid inbreeding, females will
leave the nest at two years of age to seek out a mate in another
area, Males will stay in the area where they were hatched, wait-
ing for females to come from another eyrie.

Ecology: The fire falcon is a raptor, with no natural enemy, save
mankind. Hatchlings can be trained by falconers, and a few wiz-
ards have been known to have fire falcons as familiars. They
can prove useful in keeping unwanted rodent populations at
manageable levels.

©1992 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved
 

Faux Faerie

MC14

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate/Forest
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Herbivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral

 

NO. APPEARING: 1

 

 

 

ARMOR CLASS: 4
MOVEMENT: 18

HIT DICE: 4

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: See below
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 100% (see below)
SIZE: T (1-2' tall)
MORALE: Steady (12)
XP VALUE: 2,000

The faux faerie has a mission and goal to its life: to misdirect
and lie to as many creatures as possible. It is quite happy in its
life's work, and delights in finding new and novel ways to lie
and mislead others. It has almost no powers of its own, but its
special form of magic resistance makes it seem as if it has great
magical powers.

Because it is essentially a magic-based creature, the faux faerie
can appear to those who view it as one of almost any number of
fairy-like creatures, such as sprites, brownies, pixies, lepre-
chauns, or woodland fairies. It will generally take the form of
whichever type of fairy-creature is most common to the locale
in which it is currently travelling. The faux faerie is an excellent
mimic, conversant in all of the languages of the creatures it por-
trays, and is virtually impossible to detect as an imposter, ex-
cept that it does not possess the innate magical powers and
natural abilities of the creatures it poses as. Thus, for example,
it can appear and sound like a leprechaun, but cannot play the
magical tricks that come so easily to such creatures.

The faux faerie spends its day changing trail markers and sign
posts, creating false and circling trails, and giving inaccurate di-
rections and information to passersby. It will even create trails
to areas in which such natural dangers as quicksand, rockslides,
and dangerous pits abound. It is a congenital liar, but crafty in
mixing lies, half-truths, and partial truths, so as to misdirect and
confuse without its lies being noticeable or obvious. Once hav-
ing led someone astray, the faux faerie will often follow behind
them at a distance to laugh at their plight, sometimes changing
form to encounter them yet again.

Combat: The lies and deceit of the faux faerie are one of its most
potent weapons, and more than one adventuring party has been
misdirected to its death by these pernicious little creatures, But
the most unusual feature of combat with these strange creatures
is their complete and special magic resistance, which gives them
total protection from all forms of magical spell attack, An invis-
ible aura of absorbent and reactive magic surrounds them so
that when a spell is cast upon them, the spell is itself absorbed
into their aura, where it joins dozens of other spells, circling the
faux faerie in a magical frenzy. If the aura is “full” at the time a
spell is cast upon the faux faerie, the spell is still absorbed, but a
random spell captured earlier is expelled from the aura back to-
ward the caster of the spell upon the faux faerie. This can hap-

pen multiple times in the same round and cannot be disrupted
by any physical attack. Thus, without components or motions
of casting, a faux faerie may appear to have great innate magical
abilities, as it will cast out in any round the same number of
spells which may be cast upon it that round, without suffering
spell disruption by any means.

If a faux faerie is burnt in its dormant state (see Habitat/
Society below), the results can be disastrous, as the aura is dis-
rupted and all of the stored spells are released at the rate of six
per round until the aura is fully emptied or the burning of the
faux faerie is put out.

The number of spells which can be held by the aura of a faux
faerie ranges from 24 to 48, and does not change over the life of
the faux faerie. Until the aura fills. spells are merely captured by
it, and no spells are expelled in return. Once full, the aura cap-
tures and randomly expels spells on a one-for-one basis. The
spells absorbed and expelled may be either magical or clerical in
nature and are not limited by school or discipline. The spells
which a faux faerie has stored in its aura would normally in-
clude a variety of spells which might have been cast upon it (by
both friendly and unfriendly parties), including such spells as
know alignment, charm, magic missile, lightning bolt, etc.

Habitat/Society: During daylight hours, the faux faerie goes
about its novel business, snacking on berries and nuts, An hour
before dusk, the faux faerie will seek out a suitable fallen branch
or log, three or four feet long at most, into which it melds itself
for its night's rest, and becomes a part of the wood itself—much
as a dryad will meld into her host tree for rest and replenish-
ment, The faux faerie remains in the wood until an hour after
dawn. When infused with a faux faerie, the wood of the branch
or log will take on an extremely faint blue glow from the
dweomer of the magical aura of the faux faerie. This glow,
which is indistinguishable from the blue fox fire glow which
sometimes occurs in naturally decomposing wood, cannot be
seen at all if it is still light or dusk or if there is a light source
(e.g., torch, lamp, lantern, or continual light gem) in use when
the wood is viewed. Thus, gathering wood for a fire at dusk can
be a risky proposition if a faux faerie is about. If the wood in-
fused with a dormant faux faerie is burnt, the faux faerie will
take normal damage from the fire, and its aura is explosively
disrupted as described above.

If, however, the wood containing the faux faerie is chopped
or cut (and not burnt), only six random spells will be dis-
charged. Two faux faeries will emerge from the pieces of wood
that morning, each with half the hit points and half the stored
spells of the original faux faerie. They will remain in this imma-
ture stage for two weeks, after which their hit points and spell
capacities will double. This is the only known means of procre-
ation for the faux faerie.

Ecology: A faux faerie can be a formidable storage battery for
high-level protective and healing spells, or even for offensive
spells. If captured before its aura is full, the faux faerie can be
“fed” whichever spells are desired. For example, a cleric could
cast several high-level cures on the faux faerie until its aura was
filled or nearly filled with such spells. This would allow any
spellcaster to receive such a cure during battle by casting a low-
level spell on the creature, receiving the expelled spell in return.
Obviously, there are many risks involved. First, the hazards of
trying to determine whether or not a faux faerie’s aura is “full”
should be obvious, as well as the effort involved in capturing
the creature. Second, as low-level spells are cast upon it to dis-
charge the stored spells, the odds increase that one will not re-
ceive the hoped-for spell in return. And finally, faux faeries are
not at all fond of being treated like storage batteries, and will do
their utmost to escape from any such situation.
Firedrake

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate/ Hills and mountains
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Familial lair
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Semi- (2-4)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 2-8
ARMOR CLASS: 5
MOVEMENT: 6, Fl 18(C)
HIT DICE: 4

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: l
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-8
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Breath weapon
SPECIAL DEFENSES: _ Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: 5 (4' long)
MORALE: Average (9)
XP VALUE: 420

 

Although frequently mistaken on first sighting for a young red
dragon, the firedrake is neither as intelligent nor as powerful as
its dragon cousin. It responds with flame to any stimulus.

This small dragonet—4' long, and a bit over 2' in height—has
the features and proportions of a miniature red dragon, but its
scaly hide is thinner and more translucent than that of even the
youngest of true dragons. The hide of the dragonet twitches and
quivers almost imperceptibly, and is somewhat mottled in color,
with mauve and burgundy splotches over the red undercolor.
The wings beat slowly even when the dragonet is on the ground.
In this manner the firedrake provides air flow to itself, and
wards off pesky insects. A shimmer of heat rises off of the dra-
gonet at all times.

Combat: If a firedrake is disturbed, there is a 50% chance it will
attack. Its primary attack is its breath weapon (tire), which it can
use up to five times daily. The fire forms a cone from the snout of
the dragonet to a 10’ diameter circle at the extreme end of its 60'
range, and causes 2-16 points on all affected (save vs. breath
weapon for half damage). The firedrake's claws are not used in
combat, but its bite will cause 2-8 points of damage.

The dragonet's blood burns fiercely in air, as there is a high
phosphorous content to the blood. In fact, the fire-breathing of
these creatures is actually the voluntary expelling of a jet of its
pyrophoric blood. Because of the flammability of the dragon's
blood, blunt weapons such as staves or clubs are less dangerous
than those which cause blood loss. Any creature making a suc-
cessful slashing or piercing attack on a firedrake must save vs.
breath weapon, or take 1-2 points of fire damage.

In aerial combat, the firedrake is particularly fond of attack-
ing airborne creatures from below and behind. The heat from
the firedrake and its breath attack naturally radiates upwards,
sometimes disrupting the maneuvers of creatures that depend
on relatively smooth air currents for flying or gliding. The fire-
drake will sometimes simply ram smaller opponents in their soft
underbelly in the hope of stunning them and causing them to
plummet to their deaths.

Habitat/Society: Firedrakes are familial creatures, with a mated
male and female taking up residence in a lair, which is generally
a small cavelet or rocky shelf under a ledge or outcropping.
Usually six to eight eggs are laid and tended by the pair, being

 

 

aD.
aR
ba ee

kept warm by the ample heat of the bodies of the parents. The
eggs, laid in early summer, take about 60 days to hatch. The
young firedrakes learn to breathe fire even before they learn to
fly, and are even more nervous than the adults, spouting flames
several times a day in the lair or nearby during this period.
Flight first occurs about 60 days after hatching.

The parents are very protective of their lair because of the
young. Although firedrakes normally only range 1-2 miles from
their lair, they may patrol up to twice that distance during the
times at which their young are most vulnerable to attack.

Firedrakes leave the family lair early in the spring following
their hatching, flying sometimes scores of miles before encoun-
tering a firedrake of the opposite sex willing to mate for life and
establish a new lair. The rare mating fights that do occur are
spectacularly fiery, although one male usually concedes and re-
treats before the battle becomes lethal.

Firedrakes gather no treasure, although they take no special
care to remove the bones or effects of any that they defeat.

Ecology: Firedrakes have a short lifespan compared with their
larger cousins, the dragons, usually living only 75 to 100 years.

Firedrake blood can be kept, in its liquid state, if kept in a
sealed and airtight container, or under water or some other inert
liquid. It can thereupon be used as a firebomb, equivalent to a
torched flask of oil, or used to create flaming weapons. For in-
stance, swords dipped in the blood immediately become flaming
swords for 3-6 melee rounds, although the sudden, intense heat
upon the blade creates a 2% cumulative chance per round of the
sword breaking upon impact with each blow struck during the
period in which flame engulfs it. After the flame ends, the sword
is otherwise unaffected.

The blood of the firedrake actually burns within its veins, cre-
ating the shimmer of heat that always rises from these creatures.
The burning of the blood also requires a high level of oxygen,
hence the constant slow beating of the dragonet's wings, even at
rest. If deprived of air, it will die of suffocation in about half the
time of a similarly sized creature.

©1992 TSA, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Flawder

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN:;: Temperate or tropical /aquatic
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Tribal
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Herbivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: See below
ALIGNMENT: Neutral good
NO. APPEARING: 4-80
ARMOR CLASS: 7 (—3 see below)
MOVEMENT: 3
HIT DICE: 1-3
THACO: 1-2 HD: 19

3 HD: 17
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-3 (stone dagger)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil

SPECIAL DEFENSES:

Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil
SIZE: S (31/2'-4' tall)

MORALE: Irregular (6)
XP VALUE: 1 HD: 35
2 HD: 120
3 HD: 175

Flawder are peaceful, snail-like nomads which live in aquatic
environments. They look much like upright snails, but do not
have spiral shells. Their shells are quite beautiful. Each tribe has
a different, distinctive pattern and color combination.

Flawder have two eyes, which bob at the tips of eyestalks
sprouting from their heads. Below the eyestalks is a pair of ten-
tacles, which they use to feed themselves and to wield tools or
weapons. A flawder’s mouth is a round hole with several rows
of blunt teeth inside.

Flawder speak their own language, a beautiful, musical
tongue.

Combat: Flawder prefer to avoid combat, but will fight to de-
fend themselves and their tribe. Only about half of the flawder
encountered will be armed, and the others will flee at any sign of
trouble, fighting only if cornered. An unarmed flawder can bite
for 1-2 points of damage at —1 to its attack rolls.

For every 20 flawder encountered, there will be a 2 HD group
leader. This leader will use spells as a 2nd-level wizard. A tribe
has a 3 HD chief who is a 3rd-level spellcaster. DMs should
choose spells randomly from the schools of abjuration,
conjuration/summoning, divination, or enchantment/charm.

All flawder have exceptionally tough shells. While they are
Armor Class 7 to frontal attacks, their shells are AC —3.

Habitat/Society: Flawder live in small, nomadic tribes which
travel the floors of seas or large lakes. They do not swim, but
slide along the ground. They cannot breathe air, and will
“drown” after 3-12 minutes out of water. A flawder chief rules
absolutely, normally leading the others about in search of food.
In rare instances, a chief will lead the tribe to attack a particular-
ly dangerous predator,

A flawder chief will sometimes (20%) have a familiar. A fa-
miliar might be a normal fish, crab, lobster, cuttlefish, squid, or
sea horse; roll on a dé to determine which. All familiars have
good, wide-angle vision, and all can sense underwater sounds or

 

 

 

 

 

vibrations trom great distances. Crabs, lobsters, and some fish
can attack for 1-2 points of damage. Cuttlefish and squid can
release inky clouds, blinding opponents for 1-2 rounds. All are
6"-18" long and have the same statistics as those listed in the
2nd Edition Player's Handbook under the find familiar spell.

The spells of the flawder leaders are inscribed on flat pieces of
shell about 6" in diameter. All the leaders share this “spell
book”, which is carried in a small net by a specially chosen com-
mon flawder, Tribes may also carry 1-20 similar shells on which
they have recorded histories, legends, and songs.

Flawder are hermaphrodites. With the participation of an-
other adult, any flawder can produce 3-12 soft eggs which will
hatch in 6 weeks. They can reproduce at any time, and their
young grow to adulthood in 6 months. An immature flawder
has the same statistics as a normal adult, but is only 1'-3' tall.
They reproduce often, leaving eggs at many places throughout
their territory, which helps preserve their race and replenish
their easily decimated population.

Flawder are nervous around almost any other aquatic race,
but will sometimes associate with tritons, mermen, or aquatic
elves.

Barring predators, flawder can live for up to 40 years.

Ecology: Flawder artifacts consist only of their writing shells
and their flint daggers.

Flawder are quite tasty, and are therefore hunted by many
other races, including unknowing or less civilized intelligent be-
ings.

If they travel or are transported to a place without predators,
they will reproduce at an alarming rate, eating all plant matter
in the area, upsetting the normal ecosystem and causing the
eventual death by starvation of the tribe.

Though they collect no treasure, they swallow small rocks to
aid digestion. Any flawder has a 10% chance to have 1-4 rough
gemstones in its gullet. These, plus their fine shells which can
sell for up to 500 gp, also serve to make them desirable as prey.
Fyrefly

MC14

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any Tropical, Sub-tropical, or Tem-
perate

FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Herbivore/Scavenger

INTELLIGENCE: Average (9)

TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic Neutral

 

l (but see below)

NO. APPEARING:

 

ARMOR CLASS: 5

MOVEMENT: Fl 18 (A)

HIT DICE: 1 hp (Attacks as 5 HD)
THACO: 20 (15)

NO. OF ATTACKS: l
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1

 

 

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Starts Fire

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Immune To Fire Attacks
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: ral)

MORALE: Steady (11)

XP VALUE: 175

The fyrefly is a large, slow-moving black insect with red wings
and reddish eyes. It is normally a benign insect which flits from
plant to plant, eating leaves and rotting vegetation. For most of
its life, it causes no harm to anyone. It is during the creature's
reproductive cycle when it becomes dangerous to other crea-
tures.

Combat: When a fyrefly is doused with water or hit with a cold-
based spell, it falls into dormancy. It appears dead, but will
awaken in 24 hours and begin its feeding process again.

When a fyrefly comes in contact with a flammable object,
there is a chance it will burst into flame, To determine this
chance, first determine the flammability of the object in ques-
tion. On an average fighter, for example, perhaps only 10% of
his/her attire would be flammable, while on a wizard almost
90% would be. On any hit, roll percentile dice to see if the
fyrefly hit a flammable object. Any flammable object hit by a
fyrefly, adult or larval, must save vs. normal fire or be set
ablaze. Persons in burning clothing suffer 1-6 hit points of dam-
age per round until the fire is extinguished. Hits that do not
strike burnable objects are assumed to hit flesh, causing 1 hit
point damage,

The fyrefly will only attack living creatures while it is in its
larval stage, immediately after it has reproduced (see below,) At
this time, it becomes frenzied, and will seek to set fire to any
living creature. When the fyrefly is in this agitated state, it be-
comes extremely aggressive, and attacks as a 5 HD monster
(THACO 15). Because of its extreme quickness, it becomes much
more difficult to hit, with an effective Armor Class of 5. (If, for
some reason, a larval fyrefly is resting, its Armor Class falls to
9.) During its aggressive phase, it flies at anything that moves,
believing itself to be invincible.

When in its larval state, the fyrefly is immune to fire and
fire-based attacks, but cold-based attacks will immediately
cause the creature to fall dormant. Water splashed on a larval
fyrefly will also cause dormancy if the insect fails a saving
throw vs. paralysis.

Larval fyreflies will swarm, and area of effect spells will have
a reasonable chance to take out most of the creatures, but 10%
of the creatures will always survive such an attack. Remember
that larval fyreflies usually swarm around a creature, and an

 

 

 

 

 

area of effect spell will undoubtedly affect that creature, also.

Habitat/Society: The adult fyrefly is a solitary insect, which
lives in forested areas. Fyreflies spend most of their time gather-
ing food and sleeping, waiting until the day they are to repro-
duce. Fyreflies voluntarily avoid others of their species, moving
off into their own separate feeding areas. They sleep during the
day, and feed constantly at night, pausing only to move to an-
other leaf.

A swarm of larval fyreflies are born from one fyrefly which
has fed constantly for two months. The fyrefly will seek out a
fire to fly into in order to reproduce. The ‘fly is not killed by the
fire, but rather reverts to its larval state to reproduce, It meta-
morphoses into a small, insect-shaped mote of extremely hot
fire. This may be noticed by a much brighter area inside the fire
into which the fyrefly has flown. At this time, it begins a process
of division, which, if left unchecked, will produce dozens of tiny
balls of flame. If the fire is quenched while the parent fyrefly
waits to split, the fly will be unable to reproduce, and will burn
out in 10 minutes. If the fyrefly is undisturbed, it will produce
two larval fyreflies after 10 minutes in the fire. The original ‘fly
dies, but its two offspring remain in the fire. For each succeeding
round, each will generate two offspring, after which they leave
the flame. So, two rounds after the first split, 2 fyrefly larva
leave the main fire, 4 the following round, then 8, then 16, then
32, and finally 64. The final 64 fyreflies are incapable of produc-
ing any more offspring at this time. After a larval fyrefly leaves
the fire, it burns until it is killed or sent into dormancy, or until
10 rounds have elapsed, when it falls dormant on its own and
begins its transition to adulthood. This transition takes 9 days.

Ecology: Fyreflies are the creation of the mad wizard Grebdews,
who accidentally allowed his “pets” to escape into the world.

Fyreflies would pose no problem to mankind were it not for
their peculiar breeding habits. They are prized for use in many
fire-based potions.

©1992 TSR. Inc, All Fights Reserved
Gambado

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate and sub-tropical/Plains
and subterranean

FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary or family

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Carnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)

TREASURE: R

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1-8

ARMOR CLASS: 6

MOVEMENT: See below

HIT DICE: 4

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-8/1-4/1-4

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: | Nil

SIZE: M (6' tall)

MORALE: Steady (11)

XP VALUE: 175

Known by the folk name of “Springing Skulls of Doom,” these
strange creatures construct a lair and patiently wait to ambush
passersby. The gambado are completely amoral, caring only for
their own survival, their next meal, and their personal treasure.

These extraordinary-looking creatures are man-sized, with a
powerful human torso and two arms, each ending in three very
sharp, curved claws. Supported on the strong, flat neck is what
appears to be the creature's head, but which is actually a skull of
another creature. Skulls of horned or long-toothed beasts, or
other interesting animals, are favored by plains gambado, while
those with subterranean lairs prefer humanoid skulls.

The torso narrows downward into a 3' long cylinder of carti-
lage, muscle, and skin, which can be compressed, spring-style,
and suddenly released for springing up and forward. This co-
lumnar leg ends abruptly in three long and flat single-toed feet.

Gambado are generally pale grey in color. They will often
camouflage themselves with soil and clays found in the course
of digging their pit lairs.

Combat: The gambado moves by a series of springs; jumping
vertically, it can just reach a 14’ high ceiling with its head, and it
moves horizontally at a rate of 12. The radially arrayed and re-
tractably clawed feet allow the gambado to rapidly shift direc-
tion or stop suddenly, and provide good traction during its
springing travels.

A gambado’s normal form of attack is to stand upright in its
lair, which is a pit dug by it some 6' deep, with its head just at
ground level and its leg contracted for springing. The gambado
goes to considerable effort to construct a cover for its pit out of
rock, wood, rags and old bones, with only a small hole in the
center through which its skull “head” pokes out. An approach-
ing adventurer will see only the skull, apparently simply lying
on the ground. The cover will not support the weight of any
creature larger than a wharf rat, and will not encumber the out-
ward spring of the gambado when it strikes.

If a living creature comes within 4’ or so of the skull-head, the
gambado will spring out and attack, first biting with its ersatz
“head” for 1-8 points of damage. Thereafter it will also attack
with the claws on its hands, each of which inflicts 1-4 points of
damage.

The gambado will flee rather than fight to the death.

 

 

 

 

 

}/
Habitat/Society: If a gambado kills a victim it will ignore all
booty except coins, gems, and small pieces of jewelry, which it
will immediately take. These are then compulsively sorted by
type, color, or characteristics, then grabbed back up to be fon-
dled and held up to the light, then compulsively resorted again.
Finally, the objects are taken into the pit and stored, although
sometimes artifacts are scattered about or left on the ground in
order to attract curious future victims. The gambado eats its
victim, then laboriously reconstructs the cover for its lair, and
retreats to its lair to digest its meal and await further prey. Gam-
bado can go for several months between major meals, although
they supplement major kills with vermin and insects which fall
into their lair. At least once every 10 days, the gambado will
uncover its horde of small items and compulsively sort and
readmire the various objects for several hours.

Though once thought to be essentially solitary creatures,
gambado are now often found in groups. Apparently, if a loca-
tion is successful in terms of food and booty, a gambado will
return to its former lair to collect its family to dig lairs in the
immediate vicinity. In places where bones are common (i.e.,
places where monsters, animals, and adventurers abound), as
many as eight gambado may be found to have dug pits quite
close together. Some believe that gambado communicate with
one another through quiet strumming of the ground, using ex-
tremely rapid and minute movements of their springing leg, al-
though this may be nothing more than a means of keeping the
leg muscles exercised and ready for action during long periods
of waiting.

Ecology: The hide of the gambado’s springing leg is naturally
somewhat elastic. This elasticity makes cylinders of the hide
useful as connectors to lengths of pipe and in similar applica-
tions, Gambado lairs are relatively easily noticed and avoided
by those who have previously been victims of their traps. If left
undisturbed, they may have the effect of guarding the rear of a
passing party from less intelligent wandering monsters.
Garbug

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Black Violet

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Swamp, jungle Swamp, damp ca-
verns
FREQUENCY: Rare Rare
ORGANIZATION: Pack Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night Any
DIET: Carnivore Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Animal (1) Animal (1)
TREASURE: Nil Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 2-5 1
ARMOR CLASS: 5 5
MOVEMENT: 6, Fl12(MC;:C) 6, FI9 (MC;D)
HIT DICE: 2+2 3+3
THACO: 19 17
NO, OF ATTACKS: 7 8
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4/1/1/1/1/1/1  1-6/1-6/1/1/1/1/
i/]

SPECIAL ATTACKS: _Paralyzation, Paralyzation,

blood drain rending
SPECIAL DEFENSES: _ Nil Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil Nil
SIZE: M (6’ long) L (9' long)
MORALE: Elite (15-16) Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 650 650

Garbugs seem to be related to carrion crawlers. A garbug of ei-
ther color has six tentacles around its mouth and a pair of insec-
tile wings. In other respects, they resemble lobsters, having
short eyestalks, long antennae, a hard exoskeleton, and five
pairs of limbs, with pincers at the end of each limb. The black
(male) garbug has a long proboscis and a glossy black exoskele-
ton. The violet (female) garbug is a uniform violet of striking
hue, except for the set of strong claws on her topmost pair of
limbs; these are dark yellow.

Combat: Though garbugs will readily eat carrion, they prefer
living, but immobile, prey. A garbug’s six tentacles are each two
feet long. Though each tentacle causes only one point of damage
per hit, it also secretes a paralytic poison. Victims hit by the
tentacles must make a saving throw versus paralyzation for
each hit, or be paralyzed for 2-12 rounds. Simultaneous hits are
not cumulative. The paralytic poison is also mildly corrosive,
serving the garbug as a digestive aid. If not wiped or rinsed off,
it will cause a mild burning sensation and 1 point of damage per
turn for the next two hours.

A black garbug attacks with his tentacles and his proboscis.
This feeding tube causes 1-4 points of damage on a successful
hit. lf the black garbug has paralyzed his victim during a round
in which he hits with his proboscis, he leaves his feeding tube
inserted, draining blood. Blood drain causes 1-4 hit points of
damage per round. Black garbugs are very tenacious, and will
generally fight to the death, even if they want only a light snack.

The violet garbug attacks with her tentacles and her strong
claws, Each claw does 1-6 points of damage on a successful hit.
If the violet garbug hits with both claws in the same round, she
will also rend her victim, doing an additional 1-4 points of dam-
age. Once her victim is paralyzed or dead, she will use her claws
to tear off hunks of flesh, which she transfers to her mouth, us-
ing her tentacles,

Except for the strong upper claws of the violet garbug, the
monsters’ pincers are too weak to be used in combat. They are
used to carry food, or to hold the garbug in place while it feasts.

 

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Both types of garbug are found in moist envi-
ronments. Black garbugs have no permanent lair, though a vio-
let garbug will often claim a small cave or build a nest. All black
garbugs are male, while all violet garbugs are female; the female
is dominant. They come together once or twice a year. Black
garbugs use their proboscises to fight one another in dazzling
aerial combat, trying to win the privilege of mating with a violet
garbug. About a week after a strangely beautiful mating ritual,
the violet female lays 20-40 eggs in standing water. These eggs
hatch into nymphs, which look like crayfish, but are colored
according to sex. There are usually five or six males for every
female. In two months, the nymphs undergo a metamorphosis,
acquiring their adult characteristics.

Predators, including and especially adult garbugs, keep the
numbers of developing garbugs small. Only 2-12 from any
hatching reach maturity, and travel to appropriate territories, to
lay claim to hunting ranges. Garbugs seldom live longer than
five years.

Ecology: Like carrion crawlers, garbugs perform a useful func-
tion. Besides eliminating refuse, they also prey on weak mem-
bers of other species. Garbugs are also great enemies of spiders,
and favor them as prey. Garbugs, particularly violet, are very
clever about luring spiders out of their lairs and attacking them.

Incidental treasure, as well as the other remains of previous
victims, may be found anywhere in the creatures’ hunting
grounds, Garbugs are not choosy about where they eat, and sel-
dom take victims away from where they have been killed.

Garbug tentacles are useful in the manufacture of paralysis
poisons, and might be useful in the making of scrolls, glyphs, or
other items which cause paralysis.

If a female garbug is captured while still a nymph, she may be
raised as a guard animal. A violet garbug nymph might bring as
much as 1000 gold pieces from the right buyer. Like other ani-
mals, she may be trained to recognize a few individuals, and to
follow very simple commands, such as “stay” or “fetch.” Male
garbugs have defied all attempts at training.

©1992 TSA, Inc. All Rights Reserved
 

Giant, Fog

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate/Swamps, marshes, boggy
forests, and coastal regions

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Clan, Hunting Group

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Omnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10) to highly (13-14)

TREASURE: E, R

ALIGNMENT: Neutral (good 50%, evil 50%)

NO. APPEARING: 1-4 (rarely 1-6)

ARMOR CLASS: l

MOVEMENT: 15

HIT DICE: 14

THACO: 7

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-10, or by weapon (3-18 +11)

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Rock hurling

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE; _ Nil

SIZE: H (24’ tall)

MORALE: Very steady (14)

XP VALUE: 7,000

Cousins to the cloud giants, these large rock-hurlers are more
intelligent and stealthy than portrayed in story or song.

Fog giants are huge and husky, with tree-trunk sized legs, and
over-developed arms muscled by constant throwing games and
exercises. They have milk-white skin which aids their natural
ability to blend into fog (80% chance) and gives their foes a ~5
penalty to their surprise rolls when attacking in fog or mist.
Their hair is silvery white and flowing, with ample hair on the
arms, legs, and chest. They grow no facial hair whatsoever.
They prefer to wear no armor, counting on their high natural
Armor Class. However, they occasionally wear leather armor
(AC —2), and at least one band wears armor made from white
dragon hides studded with silver. They love massive, ornate
clubs made from bleached and polished wood or bone. Fog gi-
ants speak their own tongue and Cloud Giant, and 30% speak
Common.

Combat: Fog giants generally hunt in groups of 2-5 males, al-
though they sometimes join with a cloud giant or two to forma
hunting party of 3-7. They prefer to attack from cover (fog is
most preferred). After some ranged rock-hurling to scatter their
opponents, they will charge into melee with fists and swords fly-
ing. Adult fog giants can hurl rocks up to 3-240 yards, inflicting
2-20 points of damage to anyone struck. They also have a 45%
chance of catching hurled weapons of similar size, but cannot
catch fired weapons such as arrows, bolts, and sling-stones. In
melee they generally fight with clubs and fists, though tales of
sword-armed fog giants are common.

Because of their keen hearing and highly-developed sense of
smell, fog giants are seldom surprised (+2 on surprise rolls).
Access to their caves and regular hunting camps are often pro-
tected by deadfalls of rocks or logs, which can be released by a
carefully thrown rock at the first sign of an attack against them.

Habitat/Society: Fog giants are proud of their strength and fight-
ing skills, often playing games when on hunting forays in an
attempt to best one another. Their favorite such game is called
“copsi” and consists of the giants pairing off to toss larger and
larger boulders to their partners until one of the pairs misses its
throw,

 

 

 

 

 

The fog giant families live in caves, canyons, or thickets, in
the most inaccessible areas of marsh, swamp, forest, or coast.
The men usually hunt in groups, ranging up to a dozen miles
from their homes. The groups generally are formed of giants of
similar alignment.

By tradition, a young giant may not mate until he has ob-
tained at least one large ornament of silver. Usually, the young
giant joins with several others in a quest to find one (or acquire
enough treasure to buy one).

Fog giants do not often mix well with other creatures or races,
although they can often be persuaded to perform services for a
fee, or barter goods with groups of similar alignment. Fog giants
will happily barter goods and services for refined silver.

Territorial disputes sometimes flare up between groups, espe-
cially in times of bad hunting. Friendly disputes can sometimes
be resolved by a game of copsi or an arm-wrestling match. Fog
giants fighting amongst themselves will generally throw rocks
and fist-fight, rather than use swords.

Fog giants are fond of all sorts of cooked meats, particularly
hoofed creatures such as horses, cows, deer, elk, and centaur.
They often cook meat by building a large fire, then impaling
chunks of meat on their swords and holding them over the open
flame. Fog giants prefer fruits and sweets for dessert, and will
also down large quantities of spirits if available to them, They
do not distill their own spirits or liquors. They also sometimes
smoke fresh milkweed pods in wooden pipes, though the taste is
too bitter for humans and demihumans to enjoy.

Ecology: Because of their size, fog giants consume a large quan-
tity of food, and require a considerable territory per hunting
group to support themselves. The giants will often place territo-
rial markers of boulders and logs to define the boundaries be-
tween their hunting territories. They do not look kindly on
anyone who tears down or moves these markers. Their regular
pathways are hard to hide, and are instead trapped with dead-
falls of rocks and logs to discourage trespassers.
Gibberling

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate/Forest, subterranean
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Herd
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night (but see below)
DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral
NO. APPEARING: 40-400
ARMOR CLASS: 10
MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 1

THACO: 20

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-8 (weapon)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Mass assault
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: S-M (4'-5' tall)
MORALE: Irregular (5)
XP VALUE: 15

They come screaming, jabbering, and howling out of the night.
Dozens, maybe hundreds, of hunchbacked, naked humanoids
swarm unceasingly forward, brandishing short swords. They
have no thought of safety, subtlety, or strategy, leaving others
with no hope of stopping their mass assault. And then, having
come and killed, the gibberlings move on randomly back into
the night.

The first impression of gibberlings is of a writhing mass of fur
and flesh in the distant moonlit darkness, The pandemonium is
actually a mass of pale, hunchbacked humanoids, with pointed
canine ears, black manes surrounding their hideous, grinning
faces. Their eyes are black, and shine with a maniacal gleam.
They carry short swords in their overly long arms as they lope
ever faster forward.

Combat: Gibberlings attack in great numbers, uttering ghastly
howls, clicks, shrieks, and insane chattering noises which cause
even the boldest hirelings to check morale each round. PCs need
only make a morale check if it is appropriate to their character.
The screaming mob is completely disorganized in form, and
random in direction.

The gibberlings attack with common swords, but such is their
skill and practice in using these weapons that they are +1 to hit.
Their forward motion slows only long enough to kill anything
moving, then continues forward, their bloodlust apparently un-
abated. They always fight to the death. All food in their path is
devoured, including the fallen among their own number, and
any unfortified building or objects are generally wrecked.

The only true hope of survival, should a herd of gibberlings
be encountered, is to take strategic advantage of their fear and
detestation of bright light. The gibberlings generally frequent
only dense forests and subterranean passages, loathing bright
light of all kinds, and are particularly afraid of fire. Although
their mass attacks would quickly overwhelm someone wielding
a torch, a bright bonfire or magical light of sufficient intensity
will hold them at bay or deflect their path.

Habitat/Society: It is difficult to imagine a gibberling social
structure. It can be roughly compared to the social structure of
lemmings throwing themselves into the sea, or of a school of

 

 

 

 

pirhana in a feeding frenzy. There is no sense, no organization,
and no individuality. Though they clearly have a primitive
means of communicating among themselves, they have no dis-
cernable language.

Gibberlings traveling above-ground invariably burrow into
the ground to hide during the daytime, and it is at such time that
they are most vulnerable. They can easily be tracked by the
path of chaos and destruction they leave, and can be quickly
dispatched while they lie dormant just beneath the surface of the
ground. If uncovered, they awake, but generally cower in fear
at the bright light surrounding them, and so are easy prey. Sub-
terranean gibberlings may burrow into the ground, or may sim-
ply lie down in a curled, fetal posture at times of rest. They
awake suddenly, as a group, and burst in unison out of the
ground, howling and gibbering in a most frightful way.

If captured, these strange creatures speak only their own in-
comprehensible gibberish, and show neither the patience nor
the inclination to learn other languages or communicate what-
soever with their captors. Instead, they beat against their cages
and fling themselves at barred windows and doorways in pitiful
attempts to escape their captivity.

It is unclear how or when or even if gibberlings procreate.

Ecology: Attempts to find the gibberlings’ lairs have inevitably
led back to subterranean passages, where the trail is eventually
lost in the deepest rock-floored recesses of the caverns.

Gibberlings require a prodigious amount of food to support
their manic nocturnal existence, stripping to the bone anyone or
anything that should fall in their path. Their fur is commonly
infested with lice and other pests picked up during their bur-
rowed slumber. Their hides are vile and worthless. Gibberlings
carry no treasure or other useful items. Their swords are of the
commonest variety, with no markings or decoration, and are of-
ten pitted and dull. In short, gibberlings serve no purpose and
no known master, save random death in the night.

©1992 TSA, Inc_ All Fights Reserved
 

~~ CLIMATE/TERRAIN:

Gorbel

MC14

 

 

Tropical /land

 

 

 

 

 

 

FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Herd

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Omnivore (scavenger)
INTELLIGENCE: Non- (0)

TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1-20

ARMOR CLASS: 3 (10 see below)
MOVEMENT: 1, Fl 18 (C)

HIT DICE: 2

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4 or 1-6

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Explosion

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Immune to blunt weapons
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: S (3’ diameter)
MORALE: Unreliable (4)

XP VALUE: 120

The gorbel is an odd creature, believed by some to be a distant
cousin to the beholder, or perhaps the result of some mad wiz-
ard’s experiments. They attack and eat practically anything that
moves; only their explosive nature keeps them from overrun-
ning their habitat.

The creature usually appears as a red globe of translucent,
thin rubbery material. Equally spaced around the top of the
spherical body are six tiny red eyes on short, retractable eye-
stalks. It eats, breathes, and gives birth through a tiny mouth-
like opening, and uses its short, clawed legs while walking, or in
attacks. Gorbels are a mere six inches in size when born, but
rapidly grow to full size of 3' diameter within six months. Like
the rest of this creature, the mouth is rubbery, and can slowly
stretch to fit food of up to 18" in diameter. A multitude of tiny
teeth around the edge of the mouth aid in holding onto larger,
struggling prey while the mouth stretches to accommodate the
meal,

Combat: Gorbels will attack and attempt to eat anything that
moves. They have even been known to attack trees swaying in
the breeze. An attack is initiated by rapidly drifting towards the
target, then latching on with sharp claws. The gorbel’s mode of
propulsion is not completely understood, but is believed to in-
volve magic similar to a levitation spell. Once attached to its
prey, the gorbel's grip is so strong that it cannot be detached un-
til either the gorbel or the victim is dead. Furthermore, once the
claws have found their mark, they automatically hit the victim
each round for 1-6 points of clawing damage. This aggressive-
ness is also the creature's undoing: once attached, it loses all
dexterity bonuses and drops to AC 10.

A hit with a blunt weapon merely bounces off of the gorbel’s
rubbery hide. A successful hit with a piercing or slashing weap-
on bursts the gorbel's balloon-like body. A cloud of pyrophoric
gas is thus released, and explodes for 1-4 points of blast damage
to any creature within 5' range. Magically-incurred damage
(magic missile, etc) will also cause the creature to explode, re-
gardless of damage actually inflicted.

Gorbels are not immune to the explosions of their herd-mates
if in range; entire herds have been known to have destroyed
themselves accidently in a chain-reaction explosion caused by
damage to a single creature.

The pyrophoric gas is a result of the gorbel’s unselective diet

 

 

 

 

 

and unusual metabolic processes, A combination of green foli-
age, bark and a tiny amount of scrap metal or ore (to catalyze
the process) is digested inside the creature. Ores containing
fool's gold seem to be preferred. The gas so produced is substan-
tially lighter than air, and is thus responsible for the creature's
buoyancy. It also slowly leaks out, and must therefore be con-
stantly replenished. The gas smells of rotten eggs; this smell may
reveal the presence or approach of these creatures.

Habitat/Society: Gorbel herds are loosely organized groups, liv-
ing on lush tropical vegetation or jungle rubbish and carrion.
They have no set lairs, as the herd must move frequently when
they have exhausted all of the foliage in one area. The size of the
herd is not fixed; individual gorbels come and go as their own
limited instincts determine. Occasional fights with other gorbels
over food may occur, but these generally are little more than
contests to bounce the aggressor away.

Gorbels are curious creatures, and tend to investigate any-
thing in their local environment which is out of the ordinary,
such as an adventurer’s camp. Once in the camp, they will at-
tack and attempt to eat the first thing that moves and thus
catches their attention. When something has piqued its curiosi-
ty, a gorbel will begin a frantic mewing, not unlike a kitten.

Ecology: Gorbels are no harder on the local foliage than any
other herd animals; when the food is gone, the herd moves on.
Little else is known about their lives or how they react with oth-
er creatures.

Some wizards have prepared potions of fire breath trom the
pyrophoric gas contained inside the gorbel’s body. The eyes may
be useful as components for wizard eve spells or similar magical
effects, while the rubbery hide is said to allow the construction
of a curious lighter-than-air craft, To obtain the hide intact for
such purposes, it is necessary to kill the gorbel in such a way the
body sac is not ruptured, thus preventing the pyrophoric gas
from exploding.
Grimlock

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any/Mountainous
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Tribal

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Carnivorous (Human Flesh)
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: Individual K, L, M; B in Lair
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Evil

NO. APPEARING: 20-200

ARMOR CLASS: 5

MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 2 (and see below)

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

DAMAGE/ATTACKS: 1-6, or by weapon type
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Special

SIZE: M (5!/2'-6'

MORALE: Steady (11) (and see below)
XP VALUE: Variable

Powerfully-built humanoids clad only in dark, filthy rags, these
warlike subterranean creatures emerge from their deep caverns
at night to search for unlucky humans to add to their larders.

Grimlocks have thick, scaly, grey skin and long, black, filthy
hair. Their teeth are white and extremely sharp. Their eyes are
blank white orbs,

Grimlocks are totally blind, but have highly developed senses
of smell and hearing. Their sensitive ears and noses combine to
allow them to distinguish objects and creatures within 20’, just
as well as if they were able to see.

Combat: Grimlocks are immune to the effects of spells which
affect the vision. These include phantasmal force, darkness, in-
visibility, mirror image, and many others. However, spells such
as audible glamer, or any loud, continuous noise will partially
“blind” them. This reduces their ability to perceive opponents to
a 10' range and makes them ~2 on their attack rolls. Substances
such as snuff or strong perfumes will have much the same effect
if inhaled by a grimlock or thrown in its face.

Grimlocks attack fiercely, but with little or no organization,
often stopping in the middle of battle to carry off fallen foes or
comrades for food. For every 10 grimlocks encountered, there
will be a leader of 3 Hit Dice and AC 4, for every 40 there will be
a champion of 4 Hit Dice and AC 3. These exceptional individ-
uals will usually be the only ones to show even the most elemen-
tal strategy, usually by allowing their followers to weaken
opponents before entering battle themselves.

Grimlocks will nearly always attack in darkness if possible.
While not adversely affected by light, they are intelligent
enough to realize that in total darkness, their unique form of
perception gives them a distinct advantage.

Though able to attack with their hands (for 1-6 hp damage),
grimlocks prefer edged weapons and will usually (90% chance)
be armed as follows: hand-axe, 20%; battle-axe, 15%; two-
handed sword, 15%; bastard sword, 15%; broad sword, 15%;
long sword, 20%.

Leaders or champions will always be armed with a battle-axe

 

 

 

 

 

or two-handed sword,

Grimlocks, whether normal, leader, or champion, make all
saving throws as sixth level fighters. Grimlocks gain a +1 on
surprise rolls, since their acute hearing allows them to commu-
nicate in voices too faint for other races to hear. In addition,
their morale is raised by 1 for every leader or champion with the

group.

Habitat/Society: Grimlocks lair in vast cavern complexes in
mountainous areas, They are well adapted to these environs. In
any rocky terrain they blend in so well that, while motionless,
they are completely undetectable—unless one actually bumps
into them. In any grimlock lair, there will be nearly as many
females (1 Hit Die and AC 6) as males, and at least as many
young (1 hit point, AC 6 and non-combatant). Grimlock leaders
and champions do wield some control over these communities.
However, this control is usually effective only as long as the
leader who gave the order is around to enforce his will. It is
nearly impossible for those of other races to tell one grimlock
from another—although leader types may appear slightly
larger—but they easily tell each other apart by subtle differences
in scent and movement.

Extremely xenophobic, grimlocks rarely consort with other
races. However, there is a small (10%) chance that they will al-
low medusae to share their lairs, and a 2% chance that any wan-
dering group will be accompanied by 1-2 mind flayers.

Ecology: Grimlocks will only eat the raw flesh of humanoid
creatures, vastly preterring that of humans to all others. Forag-
ing parties often raid the homes of other subterranean races, es-
pecially those who keep large slave populations (such as drow).
They are often on good terms with mind flayers since illithids
have a large supply of humanoid bodies discarded after they
have devoured the brains. Grimlocks are particularly hated by
githyanki for this reason. Since the slave flesh the grimlocks of-
ten consume (raw) is frequently unwholesome, whole com-
munities are often decimated by disease.

©1992 TSR, inc All Rights Reserved

—
Hellcat

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average (10)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil
NO. APPEARING: l

ARMOR CLASS: 6
MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 7+2
THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-5/2-5/2-12
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 20%

SIZE: L (6'-9' long)
MORALE: Very Steady (14)
XP VALUE: 3000

Hellcats are associates and familiars of the creatures of Hell, and
consequently are usually found only there. Occasionally, they
may be found on the Prime Material Plane, serving only the
most powerful creatures of lawful evil alignment. In very excep-
tional circumstances, they may serve as familiars of truly pow-
erful lawful evil wizards.

These creatures cannot be seen in the presence of any light
source. In total darkness, they appear as wraith-like beings re-
sembling a domestic cat, but about the size of a tiger. Their eyes
and fangs are crimson, Some say that the fires of Hell can be
seen in the back of a hellcat's eyes, but few have lived to verify
this story.

Combat: Although the hellcat appears to be a wraith, it is not
undead. It can only be harmed by magical weapons, which do
normal damage, minus the magical bonuses. A hellcat is com-
pletely immune to mind-control spells.

In melee, a hellcat will attack with two claws (2-5 points of
damage each), and a bite (2-12 hit points of damage).

If the hellcat encounters a party containing neutral evil or
chaotic evil creatures, it will flee. Any parties not containing
evil creatures will immediately be attacked by a hellcat which
has no master. If the hellcat encounters a group with one or
more creatures whose alignments are wavering, but tending to-
wards evil, it will join them as described below, and aid the
creature's conversion to a philosophy of unfaltering lawful evil.
For such acts, the hellcat receives special rewards and duties
when it returns to its home plane.

Habitat/Society: A hellcat is created only to serve the whims of
the rulers of Hell. It travels to the Prime Material Plane to fur-
ther the causes of lawful evil by serving the most powerful crea-
tures of better than average intelligence and of similar
alignment. In the rare instance that a hellcat is encountered
which is not already attached to a master, it will elect to serve
the most powerful lawful evil creature present. If a party con-
sisting of several creatures of lawful evil alignment but of equal
level is encountered, the hellcat will choose to serve clerics first,
then magic users (specialists are chosen over generalists), fol-
lowed by fighters, All other classes get less consideration. The

 

hellcat views less intelligent creatures as disposable servants of
Hell if the causes of lawful evil demand so.

A hellcat's service consists of aid in the performance of evil
deeds (the more evil, the better). It can communicate by telepa-
thy (range of 9), but only with the current master, whom it will
protect and defend to the best of its ability.

It is difficult to break the attachment of a hellcat to its master
but two ways are known. First, a hellcat will always be willing
to give up its current master for another, more powerful, crea-
ture of lawful evil alignment. If the new master is not interested,
the hellcat will maintain its bond with its current master. If a
new master is selected, all ties and loyalties to the old master are
lost; the hellcat will have no second thoughts about attacking its
old master, if so ordered.

The second method of stealing a hellcat’'s loyalties stems from
the fact that the creature can only remain on the Prime Material
Plane for a year and a day, returning to its place of spawning in
Hell on midnight of its last day. When it leaves, all bonds to the
master are severed. The hellcat knows of the exact day it will
return, and plans with its master accordingly, After a period of
not less than 14 days, and only if ordered by its masters in Hell,
the hellcat will return to the Prime Material Plane, but not nec-
essarily to the same place it left. Bonds with a former master are
not automatically re-established. Indeed, the former master
may have to fight a new master to regain the hellcat's loyalty.

For all of the services and protection it offers, the hellcat
makes only one small demand in return: that it be provided with
a live human to eat, once per week. Should the master fail to
deliver this payment, he may find himself to be the hellcat's next
meal,

Ecology: Hellcats occupy a special niche in Hell, similar to other
lawful evil familiars, but regarded with more esteem, If “fed”
weekly, a hellcat requires no other sustenance.
Ice Lizard

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any arctic
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary or family
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (7)
TREASURE: G

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil

NO. APPEARING: 1-4

ARMOR CLASS: 1

MOVEMENT: 9, Fl 15 (C)

HIT DICE: 3+3

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-3/1-3/1-6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spells, breath weapon
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 80% (but see below)
SIZE: S (3' long)
MORALE: Very Steady (14)
XP VALUE: 1400

In its natural form, the ice lizard is a snow-white lizard, some 3’
long, and strikingly similar in appearance to a very young white
dragon. Its scales are tinged in places with a dull silver or palest
blue. It lives in the same kind of icy, frigid wastelands favored
by white dragons. Only those who are well-studied in dragon
lore and biology will notice the slight differences in scale color
between ice lizards and their larger cousins: a hatchling white
dragon has scales of a mirror-bright pure white; it is only the
much larger, older white dragons which have varicolored scales.

Combat: Ice lizards tend to surprise opponents who know noth-
ing about them, as they can polymorph self into white dragon
form twice per day (two-hour duration each time), The ice liz-
ard’s dragon form is similar to a young adult white dragon, but
without the special attacks (breath weapon and spells) possessed
by the dragon. Reversion to ice lizard form heals 10-60% of the
damage the creature has suffered.

Ice lizards possess a high degree of magic resistance (an as-
tounding 80%), but their low Intelligence and Wisdom make
them very susceptible to charm and hold magic (—2 to saving
throws for each). They can cast fear and sleep spells twice per
day each, but only when in ice lizard form. Ice lizards are also
susceptible to fire damage: all saving throws vs. fire are at —2,
and damage is +1 point per die.

In melee, the ice lizard, in either form, can use its own frigid
breath weapon once per round every three rounds, up to three
times per day. The breath weapon is a cone of frigid air, 10’ di-
ameter at the base and 30’ long, and can inflict 2-16 points of
damage. Some adventurers have said that the breath weapon is
so cold that the very air freezes whenever an ice lizard breathes
on an opponent.

When not using its breath weapon, the ice lizard will attack
with two claws (1-3 points of damage each) and bite (1-6 points
of damage). An ice lizard is too small to make effective use of
the other attack modes inherent to true dragons (wing buffet,
tail slap, etc).

Habitat/Society: Like their true dragon cousins, ice lizards are
susceptible to flattery. They are not inclined to grant favors, and
guard their territory fiercely. However, if approached in the
proper manner, they can be made to listen—or perhaps even co-
operate, if they can be convinced the plan is to their advantage.

 

 

 

 

 

ATTC a) .

 

Such coercion requires gifts of particularly valuable gems or
magic items. Ice lizards tend to be more impressed with quantity
than with quality. Thus, 10,000 gold pieces will hold more sway
over the dragon's decision than would a similarly-valued flaw-
less diamond or emerald. Ice lizards may also occasionally be
tricked into accepting false treasure, but deal very harshly with
such deceit if they discover it.

Adult ice lizards generally live by themselves in underground
ice caves. These caves are too small to hold the ice lizards while
in white dragon form. Each male ice lizard stakes out and de-
fends a territory of about 100 square miles. No other male ice
lizards are tolerated in this territory, but it may be within the
territory of a white dragon, with which it is occasionally seen.
Because they can adopt two forms, ice lizards consider them-
selves to be superior to white dragons, while white dragons tol-
erate ice lizards as minor pests.

Mating may occur at anytime, but only once per year. To in-
dicate his interest, a male ice lizard will give a portion of his
hoard to the female he feels is strongest. The gift will consist of
up to 40% of the total number of objects, not total value, of the
male's hoard. A pair of ice lizards who are mated or have a
clutch of eggs will live together until the eggs have hatched. A
clutch consists of 1-3 eggs, which require 3 months to develop
and hatch. During this time, the male will defend the female and
eggs from other males who would seek to kill the pair and de-
stroy the eggs in order to expand their territory and take more
treasure.

Ice lizards do not have the voracious appetites possessed by
their larger cousins. They prefer small game (snow hares and the
like) but will eat carrion if nothing else is available.

Ecology: Wizards have experimented with substituting ice lizard
parts for the rarer white dragon parts in magical potions and
constructs, but without much useful effect. If an ice lizard is
hatched and raised in captivity, it may be trained to serve as a
pet or guard.

©1992 TSA, Inc. All Rights Reserved

—
 

Iron Cobra

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any
FREQUENCY: Extremely rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: None
INTELLIGENCE: Non- (0)
TREASURE: See below
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1
ARMOR CLASS: )
MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 1

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-3

 

 

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Poison
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: S (3’ long)
MORALE: Steady (12)
XP VALUE: 420

An iron cobra appears somewhat similar to a normal poisonous
snake, yet it is a programmable, magical automaton, construct-
ed of an unknown metal by some ancient wizard, or perhaps
even a minor deity.

The body of the iron cobra is divided into segments. The larg-
est segment is about 3" long, and just behind the head. The re-
maining segments taper in size closer to the tail. The creature's
body color was determined by the wizard who created it, and
often closely resembles a deadly poisonous snake such as a co-
bra or copperhead. Its construction required the use of two
specially-enchanted emeralds (value of at least 500 gold pieces
each) for the eyes; this fact often reveals the true nature of these
creatures. Iron cobras were created with painstaking detail, and
often include features such as functioning rattles, small forked
tongues, or a hood such as a true cobra possesses.

Combat: An iron cobra has no mind, so spells which affect the
mind (charm monster, sleep, hold monster, etc.) do not effect it.
Furthermore, webs (natural or magical) do not stick to the metal
from which these robots are constructed. Nonmagical weapons
inflict only half damage on an iron cobra.

The iron cobra can hide in shadows well (85% chance), and
saves versus magical attacks as its creator (usually at least 12th
level). lron cobras emit no body heat, and thus are invisible to
infravision. Once per turn, an iron cobra can move for one
round in absolute silence, attempting to move up behind a vic-
tim to attack. The fangs deliver 1-3 points of piercing damage,
and inject a dose of whatever is in the iron cobra’s fluid reser-
voir. Most iron cobras were supplied with a deadly poison,
which requires a saving throw versus poison at —2 to avoid
death. Other iron cobras were outfitted with paralyzing poison
(2-5 rounds), sleep-inducing (no Hit Dice limit; 1-4 rounds),
hypnotic (as per the wizard spell hypnotism, for 2-5 rounds), or
other drugs (norma! saving throw versus poison applies in these
cases). Regardless of the effect, the fang reservoir holds enough
liquid for three injections only. Once the reservoir has been de-
pleted, the fangs still deliver their piercing damage. Recharging
the fangs would require only two rounds—if the creator of the
iron cobra were present. However, one iron cobra was believed
to be able to regenerate the contents of its poison reservoir in 24
hours. Note that a dose refers to the amount of injected poison

 

 

 

 

 

which will affect one human-sized creature. Poison durations
and saving throws must be adjusted with consideration of the
size and mass of the victim.

Habitat/Society: An iron cobra may have been created to guard
a special treasure, or simply to act as a bodyguard, Alternately,
these automatons could be programmed to track down and at-
tack any creature whose true name is known, within a one mile
range. The iron cobra relentlessly tracks its intended victim by
homing in on its psychic vibrations, which are related to the vic-
tim's true name. The victim can defend himself by blocking
these emanations with a mind blank or similar magic effect or
spell.

Programming can consist only of a few, simple commands, as
an iron cobra has but a small memory, These commands serve
to activate, program and deactivate the iron cobra, and were
determined by the wizard when the creature was initially con-
structed, The commands understood by these unusual creatures
are simple and few in number, and might include guard, attack,
hide, come home, track, etc. Once programmed, the program
cannot be changed until the iron cobra is deactivated (dispel
magic, etc), and reprogrammed by its creator, There is a small
chance (10%) that electrical attacks, such as shocking grasp or
lightning bolt, will scramble an iron cobra’s programming, and
thus render it impotent.

Ecology: Iron cobras do not eat, sleep, or breathe. The methods
for the construction of these automatons have been lost many
centuries ago. The study of ancient lore has revealed that only a
few iron cobras were ever constructed, perhaps a few dozen to-
tal. Modern wizards value a deactivated but functional iron co-
bra at 2000 gold pieces, if the command words are known. Iron
cobras created by more powerful beings, such as minor deities,
are more accurate reproductions of nature, and thus it may be
difficult to ascertain the true nature of these creatures until it is
too late.
 

Khargra

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: — Any underground
FREQUENCY: Extremely rare
ORGANIZATION: Herd
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: See below
INTELLIGENCE; Low (5)
TREASURE: See below
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1-6

ARMOR CLASS: <3
MOVEMENT: 3, Sw (in rock) 15
HIT DICE: 6

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 3-18

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Surprise (1-7/8)
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: S (3 1/2" long)
MORALE: Elite (15)

XP VALUE: 1400

Khargra are unusual creatures from the Elemental Plane of
Earth which eat ores and metals. They are usually only found
on the Prime Material Plane if they have been attracted by a
particularly large or pure source of some metal. The metal is
necessary for the creatures’ curious metabolic processes.

These creatures appear as 3'/2' long cylinders with fins. Their
bodies are covered with closely-spaced metallic scales of iron,
naturally alloyed with traces of other metals such as platinum
for toughness. Three thin triangular tins are spaced evenly
around the tapered, cylindrical bodies, grown of the same alloy
as the body scales. Between each of the fins are conical sheaths.
These sheaths serve to protect clawed arms, which can extend
up to 3’ from the creature's body. Small eye bulges protrude
from either side of the top fin, near the front of the khargra’s
body, which is taken up by a large mouth (1’ diameter), lined
with a collection of razor-sharp teeth, The mouth can be opened
and closed like an iris, An adult khargra weighs about 300
pounds; most of this weight is its metal scales and fins.

Combat: Khargra stay in rock as much as possible, but can leap
up to 10' from the wall of a passage or chamber, like a fish flying
from water. This leap often surprises potential victims (—5 pen-
alty to surprise rolls, ~4 for dwarves, gnomes, and their sub-
races). Their target will always be the richest or purest source of
metal in the area, such as armor, weaponry, or coins. The khar-
gra then proceeds to eat the metal; it can swallow up to five
pounds of metal per round. Most specimens can consume 100
pounds of metal before becoming sated, and more for excep-
tionally large specimens.

If attacked, khargra defend themselves by biting at an attack-
er's metal weapon first, since they view such as the source of the
intrusion. On an attack roll of 16 or better (modified by the
weapon's magic bonuses), the khargra has bitten off and swal-
lowed the end of the offending weapon. To move towards po-
tential food, the khargra lashes out with its three arms, then
drags itself along. These arms strike as a 12 HD monster, They
do no damage, but at least one must score a hit. Their bite at-
tack (3-18 points of damage) will only be directed at metallic
opponents. Once a victim is grasped, the grasp cannot be bro-
ken until all of the metal has been eaten, or the khargra is killed.

While springing forth from rock occurs instantaneously, a
khargra is helpless for the full round it requires to reassemble its

 

 

 

 

 

 

molecular structure. During this reassembly period, the creature
can be killed instantly by a phase door spell. The body will then
remain on the Prime Material Plane until returned by applica-
tion of a dispel magic spell. While heat metal will do maximum
damage to a khargra, they are immune to fire- and cold-based
spells. Lightning does full damage (no saving throw); a move
earth spell will stun and confuse a khargra for 1-3 rounds.

Habitat/Society: Khargra live in herds led by a single dominant
creature. They are not believed to be territorial, freely roaming
the Elemental Plane of Earth. No one has yet discovered how
they reproduce.

Khargra are extremely rare on the Prime Material Plane, but
when encountered, will aggressively seek metals or ores of the
highest purity to eat. They can usually be distracted by leaving
the largest and purest metals behind. They seem to prefer iron to
other metals, but will occasionally (10%) supplement their diets
with platinum, gold or other rarer metals or ores.

Khargra are believed to be very distant relatives of xorn.

Ecology: Passage of khargra through rock can only be detected
where they have stopped to eat the local ore. Here they leave
behind small piles of slag, left over from their unusual digestive
processes.

If a dead khargra is dissected, nuggets (up to 50 pounds) of
puritied metal of the type the creature has eaten most recently
can be found. These nuggets are usually iron (or other common
metal, or any alloy thereof) but occasionally (10%) they may be
silver, gold or platinum.

The khargra’s fins have been used by expert dwarven smiths
in the construction of fine magical weapons. Because of the iron
and platinum alloy from which such weapons are constructed,
they hold their edge longer than common metals. Body scales
have been used in the construction of scale armor. Khargra teeth
might be made into exceptional arrowheads or spear points.

A dragon's loathing for khargra and their metal-eating habits
is legendary.

©1992 TSA, Inc All Rights Reserved
 

Mantari

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate and _tropical/subter-
ranean

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Pack

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Carnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Semi- (2-4)

TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1-6

ARMOR CLASS: 7

MOVEMENT: 1, Fl 18 (A)

HIT DICE: L#1

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4 and special

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Sting,

SPECIAL DEFENSES: _ Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

 

SIZE: S (4' wide)
MORALE: Average (8-10)
XP VALUE: 120

Mantari bear a close resemblance to marine rays, and in fact
may be related to them. Mantari have flat bodies about 3’ long
and 4' wide, and are generally black or dark gray in color. A
long, whip-like tail tipped with a stinger trails from the ends of
their bodies. Two eyes are located at the front of the head and a
mouth on the underside of the body.

Combat: Mantari usually prey on giant rats and other vermin
found in dungeons and caverns, but they are just as likely to
attack larger prey if the opportunity arises. They attack by fly-
ing quickly over their victims and slashing with their tails.

Though slow-moving on the ground, these creatures can take
off suddenly and reach maximum speed very quickly. Mantari
have an innate, magical flight ability. They are very agile fliers
and can change direction quite quickly, using their “wings” to
maneuver. They usually maintain a flying height at which the
tips of their tails can still strike, but the mantari themselves are
difficult to hit.

The mantari's tail causes 1-4 points of damage per hit, and
stings the victim. Unless the victim makes a successful saving
throw vs. poison, he/she loses two points of both Strength and
Dexterity at each successful strike, with all combat scores ad-
justed appropriately. This loss is temporary, and if the victim
lives, one point each of Strength and Dexterity will be recovered
each turn, up to the victim's original total. If either Strength or
Dexterity falls below three, the mantari’s prey can no longer
move, Once its prey is no longer moving, a mantari will land
and begin to feed.

Mantari’s mouths are ineffectual in combat, and are used pri-
marily to suck up the remains of their prey. Feeding causes one
hit point of damage per round.

Habitat/Society: Mantari enjoy damp, dirty places frequented
by vermin. They usually live in dark places with stone floors,
where they lie in wait, looking somewhat like a pool of brackish
water. They do not make nests or lairs of any kind.

Mantari live in packs and hunt together. The strongest man-
tari (male or female) leads the pack.

Mantari have a mating season twice a year, during which the
males compete in aerial] maneuvers and races to impress the fe-
males. Generally, 2-5 young are born in the air about six weeks

 

 

 

 

 

after mating. Young mantari cannot fight effectively, but mature
rapidly, reaching adulthood in just under two months. Their
parents keep close watch over them, becoming very aggressive
towards all intruders.

Ecology: Mantari serve a necessary function in caverns and
dungeons, keeping vermin populations under control. Their fa-
vorite food seems to be rats, but they also feed on giant insects
and spiders, as well as other creatures which happen to wander
through their territories. They are great enemies of bats, and are
generally unwilling to share their airspace.

Mantari are often hunted by intelligent inhabitants of their
caverns or dungeons, not for food, but in self-defense. The flesh
of a mantari has a very earthy taste to it, and is somewhat poi-
sonous. Any creature eating the flesh of a mantari must make a
successful saving throw vs. poison or become nauseated and in-
capacitated for 2-5 rounds.

If captured within a week after its birth, a mantari can be
trained as a loyal pet. If treated well by a patient and skilled
animal trainer for a period of at least a month, a mantari can be
taught to attack on command and to guard an area against in-
trusion by anyone but its master. A young mantari can bring as
much as 200 gp on the open market, from someone who wants a
loyal guard animal or pest killer.

There has been much speculation about the origins of the
mantari, While some sages believe them to be a magically en-
hanced form of sting ray, others believe them to be closely re-
lated to cloakers, trappers, miners, and lurkers above.

Great mantari

Rumors persist of a very large variety of mantari, just as fast
and aggressive, but with a wingspan of nearly 10’. These giant
mantari are said to be more clumsy in flight (maneuverability
class C), but stronger (5 +5 HD) and more dangerous (1-6 dam-
age from each tail hit). These flying horrors are said to haunt the
deepest portions of the Underdark in great numbers, frequent-
ing the same areas as trappers and their kin.
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Mephit MC14
Fire Ice Lava Mist Smoke Steam

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any Any Any Any Any Any

FREQUENCY: Common on lower planes; very rare on Prime Material plane

ORGANIZATION: Solitary Solitary Solitary Solitary Solitary Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any Any Any Any Any

DIET: Special Special Special Special Special Special

INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10) Average (8-10) Average (8-10) Average (8-10) Average (8-10) Average (8-10)

TREASURE: NX2 N N N N NX3

ALIGNMENT: Variable but always evil

NO. APPEARING: 1 on Prime Material Plane, 1-10 on lower planes

ARMOR CLASS: 5 5 6 ad 4 7

MOVEMENT: 12, Fl 24 (B) 12, Fl 24 (B) 12, Fl 24 (B) 12, Fl 24 (B) 12, Fl 24 (B) 12, Fl 24 (B)

HIT DICE: 341 3 3 3+2 3 3+3

THACO: 17. 17 17 L? 17 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2 2 2 2 2 2

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-3/1-3 1-2/1-2 1/1 1/1 1-2/1-2 2-5/2-5

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Breath weapon and see below

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below See below See below See below See below See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil

SIZE: M (5' tall) M (S' tall) M (5' tall) M (5' tall) M (5' tall) M (5' tall)

MORALE: Average (8-10) Average (8-10) Average (8-10) Average (8-10) Average (8-10) Average (8-10)

XP VALUE: 420 420 420 420 420 420

Mephits are nasty little messengers created by powerful lower
planes creatures. They are evil and malicious by nature, and
appear on the Prime Material Plane only to perform evil mis-
sions. Six types of mephits are known: fire, ice, lava, mist,
smoke, and steam. Each is created from the substance for which
it is named.

Mephits appear as thin, five-foot tall humanoids with wings.
Their faces have exaggerated features, including hooked noses,
pointed ears, wide eyes and protruding chins. Their skin con-
tinually oozes the stuff from which they were made (fire
mephits burn, lava mephits drip lava, etc.). Mephits speak a
common mephit tongue.

Combat: In battle, mephits attack with either their clawed
hands or their breath weapon, Damage is variable, depending
on the type of mephit encountered (see following for details).

All mephits also have the innate ability to gate in other
mephits; the type gated in and chance for success varies with
the mephit initiating the gating (see following for details).

Habitat/Society: Mephits love tormenting helpless creatures
and bragging about their latest evil accomplishments, They
wear garish, vulgar costumes of the most outlandish colors and
design. They are fond of large cigars and pipes, and are often
seen puffing away at some foul-smelling tobacco or pipe-weed.
They give themselves pompous, impossibly long names, such
as Garn-benaferthal-sprite-slayer-greatest-of-all-the-steam-
mephits-and-favorite-of-the-lower-planes. Mephits assume a
groveling, craven, yes-master stance around their bosses. To-
wards victims and each other, mephits drop their humble ser-
vant persona and take on the arrogant air of a superior. A
limited camaraderie exists between mephits of the same type.
Disputes between different types are often settled by a friendly
game of tug-a-demihuman.

Mephits are usually assigned to deliver some message, or to
pick up a package on the lower planes, but occasionally (5%)
they are sent to the Prime Material Plane. Missions on the
Prime Material Plane include retrieving a particular person, de-
livering a special magical item, or just spreading a little general
mayhem (so folks don’t forget the lower planes are still there).
They can be quite insufferable when encountered on a mission,

since they fancy themselves to be vitally important emissaries.

Ecology: Mephits lead brief, troublesome lives. They are quick-
ly created and destroyed, but they have no predetermined life
span, They never eat, and must return to the substance from
which they were formed to heal damage (usually 1 hit point re-
stored per turn in contact with the appropriate substance),

Captured and confined ice mephits have been used to chill
small rooms for the cold storage of perishables. Steam mephits
can heat small confined areas or power small engines. Fire and
lava mephits sometimes prove useful for heating forges and the
like.

Fire Mephit

The most mischievous of all mephits, these fiends play terrible
pranks on other mephits, such as pushing lava mephits into wa-
ter and watching them harden. They are even less kind to their
victims.

Combat: Touching a fire mephit causes 1 point of heat damage
(no saving throw). Their clawed hands rake for 1-3 points of
damage each, plus 1 hit point of heat damage per hit.

Fire mephits may use their breath weapon three times a day.
It has two forms. The first is a flame jet 15' long and one foot
wide. This jet automatically hits one target of the mephit's
choosing for 2-9 points of damage (half if saving throw is suc-
cessful). The second form is a fan of flame covering a 120° arc
directly in front of the mephit to a distance of five feet. Any
creature in the arc suffers 4 points of damage, no saving throw
allowed.

Fire mephits may also cast magic missile (two missiles) and
heat metal spells once each per day. Once every hour a fire
mephit can attempt to gate in another mephit. The chance for
success is 25% and the summoned mephit is either fire, lava,
smoke or steam (equal probability of each).

Dousing a fire mephit with a gallon or more of water will
cause it 1d6 points of damage per dousing, and the mephit will
lose its chance for attack the next round, unless it successfully
saves vs. breath weapon. If confronted with a large quantity of
water (a barrel, or the like), it will generally flee.

©1992 TSA, Inc. All Rights Reserved
 

 

 

 

 

 

Ice Mephit

Ice mephits are angular in form, with translucent, ice-blue skin.
They live on the colder ower planes and thus never mix with
fire, lava, smoke or steam mephits. Ice mephits are aloof and
cruel, surpassing all other mephits in the fine arts of torture and
wanton destruction.

Combat: Ice mephits attack with two clawed hands, inflicting 1-
2 points of damage each. In addition, their chilling touch has a
freezing effect, reducing the victim's “to hit” number by one per
hit (no saving throw allowed), These effects are cumulative, and
last three to four turns, or until the victim is healed to full hit
points (whichever comes first).

Ice mephits may breathe a volley of ice shards every other
melee round, three times per day. This volley automatically hits
a single victim within 15' of the mephit. Damage is 1d6, halved
if the victim rolls a successful saving throw vs. breath weapons.

Once per hour an ice mephit may attempt to gafe in one other
mephit. The chance of success is 25% and the summoned
mephit is either mist or ice (equal probability).

Ice mephits are of course immune to all cold-based attacks,
but take full damage from fire- or heat-based attacks.

Lava Mephit

Lava mephits are the least intelligent of all mephits. They are
slow-minded, and are frequently the brunt of fire mephit jokes.

Combat: Lava mephits generate extreme heat that can be felt 30'
away. Their claws are small and soft, causing only 1 point of
damage when they hit, but each hit inflicts an additional 1-8
points of heat damage. The touch of a lava mephit automati-
cally melts or burns most materials. The rate of this destruction
varies from three rounds to melt plate armor, to one hour to
burn through an inch of wood.

Their breath weapon, useable once every three melee rounds,
is a molten blob of lava . This blob automatically hits one target
within 10’ of the breathing mephit (1d6 points of damage, no
saving throw). A lava mephit may use this weapon a maximum
of eight times, after which the mephit must recharge by getting
in contact with a lava pool for one hour. Mephits in contact
with lava during combat regenerate 2 hit points per melee

 

 

 

 

round. This power ceases if the mephit is brought to 0 hit points
or less; at this point the mephit is dead.

These fiends may shapechange into a poo! of lava 3’ in diame-
ter by 6” deep. This maneuver does not recharge their breath
weapon, They may still be harmed normally while in lava pool
form.

Once every hour a lava mephit may attempt to gate in 1-2
other mephits. The chance of success is 25%. If two are sum-
moned, they are of the same type (equal probability of fire, la-
va, smoke, or steam).

Water in large quantities (a barrelful or more) contacting a
lava mephit will cause the mephit to harden and will slow its
movement by half. However, this will release large quantities of
sulfurous steam, necessitating a save vs. poison for any crea-
tures within 10’. Failure causes dizziness and nausea for 2
rounds, and the victim is at —2 for his/her rolls.

Mist Mephit

Mist mephits fancy themselves as spies of the highest caliber,
and practice this ability on other mephits. They are quick to re-
port other mephits who show mercy or other treasonous behav-
ior, and they never engage in idle banter with other mephits.
Mist mephits have the ability to see clearly in fog or mist. Their
skin is pale green.

Combat: Mist mephits never engage in melee unless trapped.
Their soft claws inflict just one point of damage when they hit.
Mist mephits may breathe a sickly-green ball of mist, every oth-
er round, up to three times an hour. This ball automatically en-
velopes one victim within 10’ of the breathing mephit. The
victim must roll a successful saving throw vs. poison or suffer 1-
4+1 points of choking damage, and be blinded for 1-4 rounds.
In addition to their breath weapon, mist mephits can create a
wall of fog once per day, as per a 3rd-level wizard. They can
also assume gaseous form once per day, and often use this abili-
ty to spy on others or escape combat.

Once per hour, a mist mephit may attempt to gate in 1-2 other
mephits, either ice or mist (equal probability). The chance of
success is 20%. If two mephits arrive, they are of the same type.

Powerful winds, including a gust of wind spell, will cause a
mist mephit to flee in confusion,
 

 

 

 

 

fey

soba

 

 

Smoke Mephit

Smoke mephits are crude and lazy. They spend most of their
time sitting around invisible, smoking pipe weed, telling bad
jokes about their creators, and generally shirking their responsi-
bilities.

Combat: A smoke mephit's two clawed hands cause 1-2 points
of damage each. Its breath weapon consists of a sooty ball and is
usable every other melee round, an unlimited number of times
per day. This sooty ball automatically strikes one creature of the
mephit's choice within 20’, causing 1-4 points of damage and
blinding the victim for 1-2 rounds. No saving throw is permit-
ted.

Smoke mephits may cast invisibility and dancing lights once
each per day. Once per hour, they can attempt to gate in 1-2
other mephits. The chance of success is 20%, with equal proba-
bility of fire, lava, smoke or steam mephits appearing. If two
mephits appear, they are of the same type.

When a smoke mephit dies, it disappears in a flash of flame.
This flash causes 1 point of damage to all creatures within 10'
(no saving throw).

Steam Mephit

Steam mephits are the self-appointed overlords of all mephits.
They frequently boss around weaker mephits. In addition to the
hissing steam escaping from their pores, steam mephits leave a
trail of near-boiling water wherever they walk.

 

 

Combat: Unlike other mephits, who delay attacking as long as
possible, steam mephits are ruled by their oversized egos. They
sometimes ambush even large, well-armed parties, striking first
with their boiling rainstorm, then concentrating their breath
weapons on the nearest wizard or priest.

The hardened claws of a steam mephit cause 1-4 points of
damage each, plus 1 additional point of heat damage per touch
(no saving throw). In addition, the victim is 50% likely to be
stunned for one round. These effects are cumulative, so a victim
raked twice could be stunned for two rounds.

Steam mephits can breathe a scalding jet of water every other
round, an unlimited number of times per day. This jet has a 20’
range, and automatically hits its target (no saving throw), Dam-
age is 1-3 points, with a 50% chance of stunning the victim for
one round.

Once per day a steam mephit may create a rainstorm of boil-
ing water over a 20' X 20’ area. This storm inflicts 2d6 points of
damage to all victims caught in the area of effect, with no saving
throw allowed. Steam mephits may also use putrefy food &
drink (reverse of purify food & drink) once per day to contami-
nate water.

Once per hour a steam mephit may attempt to gate in 1-2 oth-
er mephits, with a 30% chance of success, There is an equal
probability that the summoned mephits are either fire, lava,
smoke or steam. If two are summoned, they are always of the
same type.

©1992 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved
 

Penanggalan

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: = Any

FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Blood

INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 10; 8 with head detached
MOVEMENT: 12; head detached F! 18 (B)
HIT DICE: Body variable; head 4
THACO: 16

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 or2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6 or by weapon type/1-4
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Blood drain

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below

SIZE: M (5'-6’)

MORALE: Steady (11)

LEVEL/XP VALUE: 1400

A female vampire variant of great power and horrifying appear-
ance, the penanggalan appears during daylight as an attractive
human female of any character class. This “person” will resem-
ble the penanggalan before its death.

At night, the penanggalan assumes its true form. Its head de-
taches itself from its body, rising vertically and flying off in
search of human prey, to feast upon blood. Attached to the base
of the head is a 3’ long, slimy black “tail”, which tapers to a
point at one end, A penanggalan’s eyes glow red in near-total
and total darkness conditions.

Combat: In human form, the creature will fight and act in the
manner appropriate to her apparent class and level, with most
abilities undiminished. Thus, if she was a wizard in life, she can
cast spells; if a thief, she can pick pockets. If, however, the
penanggalan was a paladin before death, she is considered a nor-
mal fighter of appropriate level. If the penanggalan was a cleric,
she is limited to using only those spells which have a harmful ef-
fect, and she cannot turn undead. In this human form, the body
of the penanggalan is also vulnerable to damage as she was before
death, and her hit points remain the same as in life. The head,
however, will withstand an extra 4 HD of damage.

A know alignment spell cast on the creature in human form
will reveal the alignment the penanggalan pursued while alive;
as undead, at night, the creature is lawful evil.

In her human form, the penanggalan is immune to holy/
unholy symbols and undead turning. She also has, in either
form, the normal immunity of undead creatures to spells which
attempt to control the mind or body.

Before night falls, a penanggalan must return to one of her
secret lairs. She may have as many as six such lairs, all within an
area of 25 square miles. At her lair, a penanggalan’s head sepa-
rates from its body and flies off in search of blood. The head
always has its full hit points when it detaches, regardless of
damage to the body.

Anyone who witnesses this detaching, of the head must make
a saving throw vs. death magic or fall irretrievably unconscious

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

tor 24 hours, and then remain feebleminded tor 3 days. If the
victim makes the save, he/she is feebleminded until dawn.

The head and tail will fly in search of a victim. If a penangga-
lan cannot find a female to kill, a male victim will do as a last
resort. If there is more than one eligible female to attack, the
penanggalan always attacks the one with the highest Charisma.
When a suitable victim is found, the penanggalan will attempt
to hypnotize her prey, as per the Ist-level wizard spell. The vic-
tim must make a saving throw vs. spell with a —3 penalty, or
fall under the control of the penanggalan for as long as it takes
to feed. If a victim saves against the penanggalan’s hypnotism,
the monster will not be able to exert any further influence over
him/her and will flee in fear and confusion to one of her lairs for
the rest of the night. Furthermore, the person who made the
save will be immune to any further attacks by that specific
penanggalan and will be able to recognize that particular one
again, regardless of the form the monster takes.

The creature makes two small lacerations on the victim's
throat and feasts on the blood throughout the night. For each
night's feeding, the victim loses 1-6 hit points of damage and one
point each of Strength and Constitution. If the victim's Strength
or Constitution is reduced to zero, the victim dies.

The penanggalan will select the same victim each night, if
possible, and will continue to visit and feed on successive nights
until the victim is dead. The victim must still be successfully
hypnotized each night of the penanggalan’s visitation. How-
ever, the victim's saving throw is progressively more difficult;
the penalty is —4 on the second occasion, —5 on the third, and
so on. A break in the sequence of one or more nights will halt
the progression; the saving throw penalty will start again at —3
if the penanggalan makes renewed contact after a night's respite.

If the victim survives the night, he/she will remember none of
these events, save for some disturbingly ominous dreams, gen-
erally of dark shadowy crypts, flowing red waters, and shriv-
elled corpses stacked like wood. If for some reason the victim
avoids further attacks, even in the event of a belatedly success-
ful save vs. hypnosis, he/she will still continue to lose hit points
 

Penanggalan

MC14

 

at the rate of one per night, until the victim is dead. Dispel evil
cast upon the victim will end this loss.

Note that hit points drained by the penanggalan cannot be
restored by magical means such as curative spells, even by pow-
erful spells such as restoration, unless dispel evil has been cast
upon the victim. In effect, the victim's maximum hit points are
being drained. Similarly, the victim's lost Strength and Constitu-
tion points cannot be recovered until after the dispel evil is cast.
Once the spell has been cast, hit points are restored at the rate of
one point per day, and the Strength and Constitution points at
the rate of one point of each per week.

The victim is “asleep” during the visitations and will never ac-
tually see the creature, even if the saving throw vs. hypnotism is
made. The penanggalan will never by choice attack a victim
who is awake, but will attack any who threaten her lair.

Anyone who sees the detached head of the penanggalan when
it is flying, feeding, or fighting, must save vs. spell, or be over-
come with fear. In this form, however, the penanggalan can be
turned by a cleric; treat the monster as a wraith for turning pur-
poses. If the head is turned, it will flee to its nearest lair for the
rest of the night, and rejoin its body near dawn. If it is dispelled
by the priest, the creature is destroyed, and the body decays.

If a penanggalan kills a male victim, he does not return as
undead. If an attempt is made to raise him, his chances of resur-
rection survival are halved, A female victim will rise from the
grave in three days as a penanggalan, as a free-willed undead. If
an attempt is made to raise her within that three day period, the
chances of resurrection survival are halved. Should an attempt
to raise the victim succeed, the victim will be unable to do any-
thing other than rest for a week, after which all damage done by
the penanggalan is healed. Failure means that no further attempt
can be made; the process by which the victim becomes a
penanggalan is then inexorable.

The penanggalan takes normal damage from all weapons. If

weaponless and in human form, a penanggalan can bite for 1-6
hit points of damage, but it will try to avoid this attack form for
fear of giving away its true nature. Damage done by this bite
while in human form will not drain hit points or abilities, nor
will it cause undeath.
Habitat/Society: As a penanggalan’s head flies about, it some-
times makes a hissing noise, and at other times it makes a gur-
gling speech that is barely recognizable as Common. If an
Intelligence check is made, the listener understands the speech,
which is usually a pronouncement of doom or whispered secrets
about what it is like to experience undeath. Any who under-
stand the speech will get a —2 penalty on the saves they make
when they first witness the penanggalan’s flight.

If sunlight strikes the penanggalan’'s head when it is separated
from the body, the head will be paralyzed and fall helplessly to
the ground until nightfall. If the head and body are not reunited
within seven hours of initial exposure to daylight, both will start
to decay rapidly and the evil life-force which animates the crea-
ture will return to the Nine Hells. Therefore, a penanggalan will
always attempt to reunite her head with her body before the
first rays of dawn.

The headless body of the penanggalan, if discovered by the
living, appears to be merely a decapitated corpse that is very
well-preserved on the outside, though if any have the nerve to
examine the neck, they will see that the internal organs are visi-
ble, and dried up as if mummified. The head will “know” when
intruders have reached its body, and this is the only occasion

when the penanggalan will actively seek out and attempt to de-
stroy an enemy who is awake.

The shiny black tail protruding from the base of the head is
prehensile. It can be used as a whip to snag and choke victims
for 1d4 points of damage per hit, and has a Strength of 19. A
penanggalan frequently attacks by biting and grappling with
her tail. Treat this as a wrestling attack: if the creature gains a
hold, she inflicts normal subdual damage plus 7 points each
round for the tail’s 19 Strength. In total darkness, the tail glows
with an eerie black luminescence. This, coupled with the red
glow from the penanggalan’s eyes, makes for a truly horrible
sight. People who see this glowing apparition must make a sav-
ing throw vs. spell. A failed roll gives the victim an additional
—2 penalty when he/she finally sees the penanggalan’s full fea-
tures and must make a saving throw.

Penanggalans are solitary creatures who make their lairs in
mines, ruins, crypts, underground dungeons, or other aban-
doned buildings or structures. These places are usually pro-
tected by simple traps such as pits, deadfalls, or poisoned
spears.

These undead creatures are particularly fond of the blood of
women in their late teens to early forties, with a Charisma of 13
or greater. It has been speculated that penanggalans focus on
that group out of insane jealousy, since the penanggalan can no
longer give or receive love. If when in human form, a penangga-
lan witnesses a couple being affectionate or talking of their ro-
mance, the creature will be in such a state of homicidal fury that
she will single out the woman for an attack at the earliest possi-
ble opportunity.

Penanggalan are not good at seduction. Though they can flirt
in some small way while in human form, they cannot express
love, or engage in any displays of affection. This weakness is
enough to repulse even male vampires, who, though they some-
times have beautiful vampiric women as their consorts, would
never consider a penanggalan as a companion. Sometimes,
vampires will indirectly give clues to a party of adventurers on
the whereabouts of a penanggalan’s lair, in the hope that they
will destroy her.

When in human form, the penanggalan seeks parties of un-
wary travellers to befriend. The creature will attempt to join
them, and may in fact prove extremely useful, since over her
years of undeath, she has been able to pick up many skills and
languages, as well as a store of information about the area she
frequents. Naturally, the penanggalan will have plausible rea-
sons for her impressive knowledge, and will sometimes even
make deliberate errors, or feign ignorance in some areas. These
measures are taken in order to deflect the suspicion of party
members who may be wondering how their new companion
manages to be omniscient.

A penanggalan who joins a party will never encamp with the
party for the night, nor will she accompany them to the noctur-
nal safety of an inn. The creature will beg off, making excuses
about other duties. She may even offer to keep guard while the
others sleep. Many penanggalan attempt to pass themselves off
as rangers, who are known for their vigilance.

Ecology: Other than the blood they drain from their victims,
penanggalan do not eat or drink, though they often pretend to
do so to hide their true nature from potential victims. The slimy
tail of the penanggalan’s head is useful in creating various types
of potions of undead control, as well as amulets of turning.

©1999 TSA, Inc. All Rights Reserved
 

Pernicon

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Desert
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Swarm
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Semi- (2-4)
TREASURE: U, Y
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO, APPEARING: 4-200 (in lair 300-3000)
ARMOR CLASS: 3
MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 1 hit point each
THACO: 20

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-10

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Constitution drain
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: T (2" long)
MORALE: Unreliable (4)
XP VALUE: 15

The pernicon is a brightly colored insect that resembles a grass-
hopper. Its coloring is an odd mixture of red, yellow, ocher, and
blue.

This species of insect dwells in the outer regions of deserts,
and is much in demand by desert nomads and other sentient in-
digenous life for its powers of water divination.

Combat: As a rule, the pernicon is an inoffensive creature, but it
will attack in large numbers if disturbed.

Pernicons form swarms when attacking. They leap upon their
victims and grip exposed flesh with the pincers located at the
rear of their abdomens. Pernicons are quite capable of worming
their way under clothing or through joints in armor, so protect-
ive clothing or equipment is not complete proof against them. It
takes at least ten pernicons to mount an effective attack, and
each swarm of ten makes one attack each round. No more than
five swarms can attack a single man-sized creature at once. For
larger creatures, one additional swarm can attack per size class
larger than man-sized; for smaller creatures, subtract one
swarm per size class.

Attacks with blunt weapons do normal damage to a pernicon
swarm. Each point of damage inflicted will kill one insect. Pierc-
ing and slashing weapons can kill only one insect per successful
attack. When one or more pernicon in a swarm are killed, any
additional pernicons in the area immediately join it to bring the
number back up to ten.

When a swarm “hits,” the victim suffers 1-10 hit points of
damage (per swarm) from the pincers. In addition, the perni-
cons drain water and other bodily fluids from the target, caus-
ing the loss of one point of Constitution. Each round thereafter,
this drain will continue automatically (no roll required).

If a victim's Constitution falls to three or lower, the victim
collapses into unconsciousness. If the Constitution falls to zero,
the victim dies. A raise dead spell will recover 50% of a slain
victim's Constitution, while resurrection will recover 75%. If
the victim survives, he/she will recover lost Constitution points
at his/her natural healing rate for lost hit points.

Spells such as fireball will kill every pernicon in the area of
effect. A flaming torch or Flame Tongue sword will kill 2d4
pernicons each round; a pool of flaming oil will kill 2d8 perni-
cons on the round it ignites, but the insects will avoid the area
thereafter. Strong winds, including a gust of wind spell, will dis-

  
   

 

 

 

 

perse all swarms in the area of effect.

Habitat/Society: A colony of pernicons settles in conical-shaped
mounds of dirt, sand, and silt ranging from 3'-5’ high. The sur-
face of the cones is dotted with exit holes, which the pernicons
use to get the swarm out quickly. Colonies are usually spaced
apart at intervals of no less than three miles, and different
swarms have been known to compete for the same living space.

Normally, pernicons leave their mounds at dusk, looking for
moisture and dew on plants and rocks, The pernicons’ antennae
are sensitive to water, vibrating and giving off a low hum when
within 12 miles of a large quantity of water, such as a lake, oa-
sis, or river. Some pernicons will even change their coloration
when they are within 90’ of a body of water of any kind.

Pernicons lay eggs during the rainy seasons, generally twice a
year in the desert. One pound of eggs are laid per 300 pernicons.

The rear legs of the pernicon create a clacking noise when
rubbed together. Some scholars speculate that this is a language,
but there is no conclusive evidence of this. Sometimes, pernicon
hunters home in on the insects by the noise.

Ecology: Merchants sell live pernicons for up to 10 gp per insect,
claiming them to be expert water finders. Many desert crea-
tures, such as brass dragons, sandlings, and lamias, savor the
pernicons as an excellent meal, and treat pernicon eggs as a deli-
cacy similar to caviar. The more cultured desert tribes also sa-
vor the eggs in this way, and will pay the equivalent of up to 50
gp per pound.

The pernicon is so saturated with water, that eating a dozen
or so of the raw insects not only provides a human-sized diner
with a meal's worth of protein, but also gives the eater the
equivalent of a quart of water. This has earned the pernicon the
nickname “walking cactus” by some nomadic tribes, many of
whom have extensive recipes for preparing pernicon.

Alchemists and wizards use pernicons in their formulae for
creating decanters of endless water, or in experimental water
divination spells or items.
Phantom Stalker

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any
FREQUENCY: Very Rare
ORGANIZATION: Group
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Fire
INTELLIGENCE: Semi- (2-4)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1-2
ARMOR CLASS: 3
MOVEMENT: 12, Fl 24 (D)
HIT DICE: 6

THACO: 1S

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-8/1-8
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Impervious to fire
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: Ly
MORALE: Elite (16)
XP VALUE: 650

Phantom stalkers are creatures from the Elemental Plane of Fire,
and are found on the Prime Material Plane only in the role of
servants to high-level mages.

In its raw elemental form, the phantom stalker appears as a
slim pillar of fire with vague outlines of arms, legs, and a head,
resembling an emaciated fire elemental. When on the Prime Ma-
terial Plane, the creature's most common form is that of a mus-
cular, reddish humanoid, 7' or more tall, with fiery eyes. Their
faces are elongated versions of a human face, with a pointed
chin and high forehead. When angered, they lose their solid
form, appearing much as a burning ghost. However, phantom
stalkers have the ability to polymorph self, and have been
known to appear in various forms, Most of the forms they as-
sume incorporate the colors red, yellow, and orange. Phantom
stalkers can fly, and this ability is apparently unimpaired by the
shape they assume,

Phantom stalkers are magically able to speak the Common
tongue of any world of the Prime Material Plane, in addition to
the language common to all denizens of the Elemental Plane of
Fire.

Combat: Phantom stalkers normally attack with their two sets
of sharp claws, each of which can inflict 1-8 hit points of dam-
age. If both sets hit, the stalker has a grip on the target and pulls
the unfortunate victim to its fiery body, causing an additional 12
points of fire damage. The phantom stalker is able to cool its
body to 70° Fahrenheit, so that it can lift or carry things without
incinerating them. The creature has a Strength of 18/50.

Phantom stalkers are invulnerable to all sorts of fire attacks,
and magical fire attacks (including fiery breath weapons) in fact
heal the phantom stalkers one hit point for each Hit Die of fire
attack. However, phantom stalkers save at —2 versus cold at-
tacks, and such attacks add two points of extra damage per at-
tack die.

[f a phantom stalker is reduced to 10% or less of its original hit
points, it can cast forth its dying life essence into a 6 HD fireball,
after which it dematerializes and dies, The explosion is centered
on the stalker itself. This is done only as a last resort, and is never
done if it will harm the stalker's summoner—unless the summoner
is directly and immediately responsible for the phantom stalker's
demise, Those who would summon phantom stalkers would be
wise not to give them hopelessly suicidal commands.

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: On the Elemental Plane of Fire, phantom stalk-
ers have no true organization. In fact, they are often bullied
around by fire elementals, efreet, and salamanders.

When a stalker is summoned by a mage, it is generally grate-
ful for its departure from the Plane of Fire, and wishes to serve
the mage loyally. Paradoxically, it is also instinctively resentful
about being summoned, a trait common among many denizens
of the Elemental Planes.

Phantom stalkers are summoned by a variant of the invisible
stalker spell. The spell summoning the phantom stalker requires
a piece of coal carved in the shape of a flame; otherwise, the
spells are identical. A mage must exercise great caution in giving
a phantom stalker instructions, since the stalker will try to per-
vert those instructions by taking the mage’s words literally and
following them to the letter. This is a nasty habit that phantom
stalkers picked up from efreet. Aside from this little quirk, the
summoned creature serves well as a bodyguard.

There is one explicit instruction inherent in their summoning.
If the summoner is killed, his/her phantom stalker(s) will vanish
into the Ethereal Plane, where it will spend 1-4 hours tracking
down the killers. The stalker will unerringly find the killers, un-
less the latter are continually hidden by spells or other non-
detection devices or abilities. Phantom stalkers gain this
tracking ability only upon the death of their masters. The ability
disappears once the summoner’s slayer has been tracked,
though it will return one more time if the slayer has escaped,
giving the phantom stalker one last chance to find the killer.

After tracking down the summoner's killers, the phantom
stalker will reappear on the Prime Material Plane, intent on
vengeance.

Ecology: Besides being the whipping boys of the Elemental
Plane of Fire, phantom stalkers are prized for the liquid fire that
flows through their bodies. If this essence can be captured, it can
be used to create Flame Tongue swords.

©1992 TSA. Inc. All Rights Aegeryed
Quaggoth

MC14

 

~ CLIMATE/TERRAIN:

Subterranean caves

 

 

 

 

 

 

FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Tribal

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: Nil (O, R)
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 2-24

ARMOR CLASS: 6

MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 2+2

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2orl
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4/1-4 or by weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Berserk rage
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Immune to poison
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: L (7! + tall)
MORALE: Elite (15-16)

XP VALUE: 175

Jald 270
Thonot 1,400

Quaggoths are humanoids with long, shaggy, white hair cover-
ing their entire bodies. They wear no clothing. Warlike and vi-
cious, they roam the Underdark looking for prey. Drow
sometimes enslave them as guards and spider handlers.

Quaggoths speak a halting form of Undercommon, and can
grasp only simple concepts. More intelligent quaggoths may al-
so speak a few words of Duergar, Drow, or Common.

These aggressive beasts have infravision with a range of 120’.
They are immune to all poisons.

Combat: Quaggoth tribes claim a certain territory as theirs and
patrol it, hunting for food. Any detected animals or creatures
(such as a party of adventurers) invite certain attack.

Most tribes (70%) of quaggoths do not carry weapons, and
attack with their claws for 1-4 hit points of damage per hit. The
remainder of quaggoth tribes carry stone clubs or axes, Those
quaggoths which are or have been drow slaves carry superior
weapons, such as steel battle axes or two-handed swords.

If a quaggoth is reduced to 25% or less of its original hit
points, it enters a berserk fury and receives a +2 bonus to its
attack and damage rolls, This rage lasts until the quaggoth dies
or all enemies are dead or out of sight.

For every 12 quaggoths encountered, there will be a leader, or
jald. The jald has 3 +3 Hit Dice and wears leather or skins, mak-
ing it AC 5. In addition, it gains a +1 bonus to damage rolls.
Jalds direct combat; if no jald is present, the quaggoths will fall
upon their prey, whatever it is, in an unorganized manner

Any quaggoth tribe has a 20% chance of having one or two
thonots. A thonot is the quaggoth equivalent of a shaman. In-
stead of magic, however, thonots use psionics. A thonot will use
its abilities to aid the tribe in combat, escape, or healing.

If quaggoths win combat, they take all bodies, including
those of dead quaggoths, to their lair and devour them.

Psionics Summary (Thonots only):
Level Dis/Sci/Dev Attack/Defense Score PSPs
3 2/2/5 MT/MBI 15 50
Only have:
¢ Psychokinesis - Sciences: telekinesis. Devotions: control
flames, molecular agitation.

 

  

we <@)

Hi, a OE
‘i Aig oe a

oO.

|

    

   

\ ole
i/ |
Nal

Y

 

 

 

 

¢ Psychometabolism - Sciences: shadow-form, Devotions:
cell adjustment, expansion, reduction.

Habitat/Society: Quaggoths are nomadic hunters. They change
territories periodically. In each new territory, they claim a cen-
tral cave as a lair, leaving treasure with a few guards. The rest of
the tribe hunts, returning periodically to rest and change
guards.

Females are equal to males in numbers and abilities in a quag-
goth tribe. For every adult quaggoth, there will be one young.
Half of these young are unable to attack or defend; the other
half have 1+1 HD and the same AC and attacks as adults.

Thonots control what passes for religious life among quag-
goths, They oversee what few rituals there are; those rituals
which are known include the daily preparation for hunting,
coming of age, and death (a brief whistling to send the spirit
away before the rest of the quaggoths eat the body).

Quaggoths can mate at any time of the year. They are not
known to have any courtship or mating rituals. Young are born
about ten months after mating. Births are usually singular, but
twins are not uncommon.

The origin of quaggoths is unknown, Some sages claim that
they were once a semi-civilized race which dominated much of
the Underdark through conquest and ritual sacrifice, until the
drow, duergar, and other races broke their power. Others spec-
ulate they had some sort of civilization on the surface and were
driven underground; this theory is supported by the quaggoths’
hatred for surface-dwelling dwarves and elves.

Ecology: Quaggoths produce a few artifacts, mostly crudely
carved stone items. A few seem to be talented at making neck-
laces with wooden, bone, or stone beads

Quaggoths fear no creature. Though they are dangerous
hunters, they are just as often prey for other predators of the
Underdark. Quaggoths can be trained as servants and guards if
captured early.
 

Retriever

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Abyss
FREQUENCY: Very Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: zZ
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: =2
MOVEMENT: 18

HIT DICE: 10

THACO: 11

NO. OF ATTACKS: 4
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 3-18/3-18/3-18/3-18
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Eye rays
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 20%

SIZE: L (12' tall)
MORALE: Fanatic (17)
XP VALUE; 7,000

Retrievers are created by powerful creatures of the Abyss, either
by the mysterious rulers of the race called Tanar'ri, or by the evil
deities who claim a layer of the Abyss as their domain.

These foul creatures will rarely be found on the Prime Materi-
al Plane except when engaged on a specific mission. As can be
guessed from their name, retrievers are sent to bring back, dead
or alive, an individual or group of individuals who have offend-
ed one of the powers of the Abyss.

The most common form of the retriever is a giant spider-like
creature, whose front four limbs end in large bone projections
that bear an uncomfortable resemblance to giant cleavers. Re-
trievers have six eyes: two are for vision, and the other four
have other specific functions (see below). Due to their low Intel-
ligence, retrievers are unable to communicate with dwellers of
the Prime Material Plane.

In rare instances, especially if the target in question is well-
versed in the lore of the Abyss, the retriever can appear as a
scorpion-like creature, with the same abilities as in its spider
form,

Combat: Once a retriever is within physical sight of its target, it
is fearless and relentless in its singleminded pursuit of its quarry.
The primary, and usually initial, attack of the retriever is with
its four sightless eyes. The blind eyes each have a different one
of the following four innate abilities: sheet of flame (10 HD
damage), cone of cold, lightning bolt, and stone to flesh. The
eye attacks are cast as a 10th-level wizard. Up to two of these
special eyes can function in any given round, determined at ran-
dom, Once used, a particular eye needs six rounds for recharg-
ing.

Retrievers can attack with all four cleavers simultaneously,
each inflicting 3-18 hit points of damage. The eye rays cannot be
used while the retriever is attacking with its cleavers. A favorite
retriever tactic is to spend the first two rounds using its eye at-

 

 

 

 

 

tacks, then closing in with the cleavers while the eyes recharge.

In order to find their quarry, retrievers can cast find the path
and magic mirror six times a day each. The retriever's stone to
flesh eye doubles as the surface needed for the magic mirror
spell to work.

Like the Tanar'ri, retrievers have the following additional
powers: darkness 15' radius, infravision, and teleport without
error.

Creatures under 6 HD and adventurers of fifth level or lower
will flee in panic \when a retriever comes within 30', unless a
saving throw vs. magic is made. Creatures of animal Intelli-
gence or lower get no saving throw, and flee automatically.

Habitat/Society: Many rumors surround the retriever. One ru-
mor states that a retriever will seek out its target for as many
years as there are layers in the Abyss. Another rumor hints that
dead humans and drow of chaotic evil alignment are actually
transformed into retrievers. Only the most heartless, cruel, and
cunning souls are allowed this opportunity. It is said that if they
succeed, their eternal torment is lessened as a reward. With such
a motivation, it is not surprising that retrievers are so tenacious.
Sometimes, when Tanar'ri take part in the hunt for the target,
the retrievers are used as mounts. Retrievers are the size of
mammoths, and make excellent steeds for all but the very larg-
est Tanar’ri. The Tanar’ri use howdahs to ride the retrievers.

Ecology: Retrievers function as disposable bloodhounds. The
process of creating these creatures is a secret known only to the
rulers of the Abyss and the lords of the Tanar’ri, and would nev-
er be revealed to anyone else from any other plane.

When a retriever is killed, it immediately disappears in a puff
of reddish-green smoke equivalent to a stinking cloud spell. The
cloud and its resulting effects linger for 1-6 rounds. Beyond this,
there is never any physical evidence left of the retriever.

©1992 TSA, Inc. All Rights Reserved

a,
 

Ruve

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Pack
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Highly to Genius (13-18)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Lawful good
NO, APPEARING: 1-10
ARMOR CLASS: 5
MOVEMENT: 18

HIT DICE: 4+4
THACO: 16

NO. OF ATTACKS: l
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6

 

 

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Psionics

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Psionics

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 15%

SIZE: S (3’ high at shoulder)
MORALE: Very Steady (13-14)
XP VALUE: 975

Ruve are a breed of dog which possesses formidable intelligence
and psionic powers. Their coloring ranges from a sandy brown
to glossy black, and they are often mistaken for wild dogs or
war dogs. The eyes of a ruve show an alertness that goes beyond
normal canine levels.

Typical ruve are quite polite and disciplined, though they will
often act like regular dogs in order to ascertain the intentions of
a party. Normally, they reveal themselves as ruve only to parties
that appear to be of predominantly good alignment. Ruve un-
derstand Common, but cannot speak it.

Combat: Ruve do not like to bite opponents, as they consider
this to be beastly behavior, preferring instead to use their psi-
onic powers against hostiles. They act and fight in well-trained
packs, using complex strategies and tactics to maneuver oppo-
nents into a disadvantageous position.

As a rule, ruve are not bloodthirsty, and are content with
knocking out or driving away an enemy. Despite this, if the ruve
are against an identifiably evil opponent, they will attack to kill.
In melee situations, ruve are bold and daring, and not easily in-
timidated.

Psionics Summary:
Level Dis/Sci/Dev
4 3/3/11
Common powers:

e Psychokinesis - Sciences: telekinesis, detonate. Devotions:
animate object, control body, control flames, control sound.

© Telepathy - Sciences: mindlink, probe. Devotions: conceal
thoughts, contact, invisibility, mind bar, send thoughts,
truthear.

* Psychoportation - Sciences: probability travel. Devotions:
time/space anchor.

Score PSPs
=Int 100

Attack/ Defense
EW, PB/TS,MBr, TW

Habitat/Society: The location of the ruve's homeworld is unre-
vealed, but their wanderings have led them to other planes and
worlds, Their ability to adapt is remarkable, and their tempera-
ment adjusts to suit the world in which they find themselves.
Warm, dry caves are the choice lairs for ruve. Females fight as
well as males. A mated pair of ruve can produce a yearly litter
of 2d4 pups, each with 2 +2 Hit Die, and only the discipline of

 

 

 

 

 

Telepathy and its accompanying abilities. Ruve reach maturity
in one year.

Ruve are extremely intelligent and have a well-developed cul-
ture. They use their psychokinetic powers to create works of
art, and will often gather to how! their soaring and hauntingly
beautiful compositions.

Unfortunately, this sense of culture has made the ruve snob-
bish. They look down on other species of special dogs such as
blink dogs or the lhee of Wildspace, considering them rustic
peasants. Mundane dogs such as wild dogs, war dogs, or nor-
mal domestic breeds are beneath insulting. If a ruve connects
with a human or demi-human mind that is less intelligent than
its own, that poor individual will never hear the end of it, The
most obnoxious ruve are found on Krynn, Oerth, Toril, and in
Wildspace. Small packs roam about, telling people about their
original home, a barren desert world where metal is scarce.
Many people, however, dismiss the ruve'’s reminiscences as tall
tales.

Ruve often have the tendency to mentally send little-known
trivia facts to adventurers, regardless of the situation.

Sages or high-level mages are often the target of sudden visits
by the ruve, since the pack is always interested in seeking out
new knowledge and facts.

Ecology: Ruve are well-suited for trimming the number of evil
psionic monsters. They are natural enemies of intellect devour-
ers, illithids, su monsters, and thought eaters. When faced with
these opponents, all snobbery is forgotten and they attack with
a feral intensity borne of instinctive hatred.

Although they do not get fleas, ruve sometimes acquire cere-
bral parasites. Any ruve encountered have a 35% chance of
each dog having 1d4 parasites.

Paladins and lawful good clerics or psionicists seek out the
company of ruve as loyal companions, No one else seems to
have the patience required to stand the ruve's intellectual pos-
turing.
Scathe

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Scathe Larvae
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Icy plains Icy plains
FREQUENCY: Rare Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Pack Nest
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night Night
DIET: Carnivore Carnivore

(carrion) (carrion)
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7) Non- (0)
TREASURE: QOx5 Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 4-16 2-5
ARMOR CLASS: 5 9
MOVEMENT: 1, Skating 24 1
HIT DICE: 4+4 1
THACO: 15 19
NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4/1-4/2-12 1-6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Poison Nil
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Camouflage, Nil

Spell Immunity
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil Nil
SIZE: M (5') T (1'-2')
MORALE: Very Steady (16) Fearless (20)
XP VALUE: 975 35

Scathes are a uniform milky-white in color, Their tough, leath-
ery skin is completely hairless. A thin membrane stretches be-
tween arm and body, ending at the knee. The claws on their feet
are quite long, and curve underneath their feet, serving as natu-
ral ice skates. Using their arm membranes as sails, they skate
rapidly over desolate arctic plains.

Scathes have excellent infravision, good to a range of 120’.
They also have the ability to sense heat emanations from incred-
ible distances, and can locate a warm-blooded body of human
size from as far away as a mile.

Scathes are closely related to harriers, jungle predators which
use their arm membranes to glide from trees.

Combat: Scathes are very difficult to detect when they are mo-
tionless against a background of ice and snow, giving opponents
a —2 penalty on surprise rolls. Even moving, they are difficult
to see at night, when they normally hunt. A scathe’s body tem-
perature difters only slightly from that of its surroundings, so
infravision is almost useless in detecting them, If other sounds,
such as howling winds, hide the sounds of their skates on the
ice, their opponents are still ~2 on surprise rolls.

Adult scathes hunt in packs. They swoop towards their oppo-
nents, using their claws and beaks to attack. If a scathe hits with
its beak, there is a 25% chance for a burning poison to be inject-
ed into the victim, The poison causes an additional 2-12 points
of damage, and the pain will cause victims to make attack rolls
with a —2 penalty. A successful saving throw vs. poison will
halve the damage and eliminate much of the pain effects, leav-
ing the victim at —1 to attack rolls, up to a maximum of —2 for
multiple attacks. The effects of the poison last for 5-20 rounds;
during this time stricken opponents cannot benefit from any
Dexterity bonuses to their Armor Class.

Scathes are immune to all cold-based spells, and to white
dragon breath.

Habitat/Society: These monsters communicate in a rudimentary
fashion, using howls and shrieks which others often mistake for
the violent arctic winds which whip through the creatures’ ter-
rain, They lair in hollows and ravines in icy plains, roaming in

 

 

 

 

 

packs throughout the territory. A pack leader is male, as are 1-4
other pack members. Each male has a “harem” of 1-4 females.

Pack leaders change with some regularity. The strongest
young scathe challenges the pack leader, and the two fight mer-
cilessly for supremacy, often until both are dead and another
scathe steps in to lead the pack. The losers’ females divide them-
selves among the remaining male scathes.

Mating season occurs once a year. About a month after mat-
ing, a female scathe lays 2-12 eggs in a crude nest in the lair.
Only 2-5 of the eggs survive predators, accidents, and snacking.
These hatch into larvae, voracious monsters which devour any
food they can find. A very few larvae, 1-3, survive the two
months needed to develop into small, but fully developed,
scathes. When the change from larval stage occurs, they imme-
diately become members of the pack.

Scathes have no true society beyond the pack, and there is no
evidence of civilization among them.

Ecology: A scathe pack will attack any animal which moves
close enough to be detected by them, including large and aggres-
sive creatures such as dragons. They will also eat any available
carrion, including dead or severely wounded scathes.

A scathe egg or larva might be worth up to 500 gp to a buyer
who wants a vicious, unpredictable guard animal. Scathes are
virtually untrainable. They become lethargic if taken to warmer
environments.

Larvae

Scathe larvae are identical to those of the harrier: small, worm-
like creatures with mottled brown skin. They have a well-
developed, though toothless, beak when they hatch, and this
beak grows and develops as they do. A nearly-mature larva has
limbs and other organs visible just under its skin. If enough food
is available, the larva matures rapidly, shedding its skin after
two months.

©1992? TSA, inc. All Fights Reserved
Sheet Ghoul, Sheet Phantom

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Sheet Ghoul Sheet Phantom
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any Buildings
FREQUENCY: Very rare Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Night
DIET: Corpses Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10) Average (8-10)
TREASURE: Nil Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1 1
ARMOR CLASS: ¥i 3
MOVEMENT: 9 6, Fl6 (C)
HIT DICE: 4+2 3
THACO: 17 18
NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-3/1-3/1-6 1-4
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Acid squirt Suffocation
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil Nil
SIZE: M (5'-7’ See below
MORALE: Very Steady (14) Very steady (13)
XP VALUE: 650 270

Sheet ghouls are created when sheet phantoms kill their victims.
Under normal circumstances, sheet ghouls are indistinguishable
from normal ghouls. Upon close inspection, many sheet ghouls
appear to have wispy, spiderweb-like strands of white material
clinging to their faces, or carry what look like burial shrouds.
These characteristics are the remains of the sheet phantom’s
form.

Sheet phantoms appear as a nearly transparent, rectangular
sheet. Their color ranges from snow white to dull grey, and their
dimensions vary: 11' to 16’ wide, 7’ to 12' long, and a quarter of
an inch thick. They have no facial features, save for two glow-
ing green spots which function as their eyes. These spots are on-
ly visible when the creature has found a victim and is about to
attack.

Combat: A sheet ghoul attacks with its two claws, each doing 1-
3 hit points of damage, and its fangs, which cause 1-6 hit points
of damage.

Unlike the conventional ghoul, the sheet ghoul’s touch does
not cause paralysis. However, the sheet ghoul can squirt a fine
jet of corrosive acid out of its mouth, which causes 1d8 +1 hit
points of damage; a successful save vs. breath weapons halves
this amount. The acid stream has a range of 10’.

Sheet ghouls are treated as spectres for turning purposes, and
they are subject to all attack forms except sleep, charm, and
similar mind-affecting spells.

Sheet phantoms move along the walls and ceilings of a house
or other building, and drop on potential victims. If the sheet
phantom hits the intended target, it envelops the victim, causing
suffocation for 1-4 hit points of damage each round subsequent
to the initial attack, Note that no damage is done the first round.

Victims enveloped by a sheet phantom cannot move, and if
the sheet phantom is hit while it is enveloping a captive, the vic-
tim suffers the same amount of damage. Only one man-sized (or
two dwarf-sized or smaller) victims may be enveloped at one
time, since the creature wraps itself tightly around the victim.
The victim cannot fight back unless the weapon is dagger-sized

 

 

 

 

 

or smaller and was actually in the victim's hand when he/she
was enveloped. Sheet phantoms have an effective Strength of
15, and a successful Bend Bars/Lift Gates attempt made by the
victim will free him/her. Only one such attempt may be made
per round,

If the victim dies enveloped within the sheet phantom, the
sheet phantom merges with the body, creating a sheet ghoul.
This process takes 12 hours to complete.

Sheet phantoms are vulnerable to all attack forms except
sleep, charm, and other mind-affecting spells, and are treated as
wraiths for purposes of turning,

Habitat/Society: Sheet ghouls enjoy haunting old castles, ma-
nors, and houses, especially if these structures have a family
crypt or cemetery. Corpses are the preferred meal for sheet
ghouls, though they are not above eating a living victim. Nor-
mal ghouls and ghasts can instinctively differentiate between
their counterparts and a sheet ghoul. Sheet ghouls are reviled by
normal ghouls and ghasts, and are often driven away by them.

Sheet phantoms dwell inside structures that have beds. The
building may be abandoned, or one that is little used. There
have even been occasions when sheet phantoms have taken up
residence in the little-used guest rooms of prosperous manors.

There are sufficient similarities between the sheet phantom
and the lurker above for some scholars to speculate that the
former is an undead form of the latter. However, other sages
and scholars claim that sheet phantoms are actual sheets that
have absorbed the life-essence of an evil person who died in
their bed, The evil soul is trapped in the sheet, and forced to
wander about as a sheet phantom.

Ecology: Though undead, sheet ghouls enjoy devouring both
carrion and freshly killed prey.

Sheet phantoms do not need to eat, so there is no overriding
need to merge with their victims. Sheet phantoms kill for the
simple evil pleasure of it.
 

Shocker

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any land
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: Q
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 2-8
ARMOR CLASS: 0 or 10 (see below)
MOVEMENT: 15
HIT DICE: 5-10
THACO: 5-6 HD: 15
7-8 HD: 13
9-10 HD: 11
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 3-12 electrical
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below
SIZE: M (6' tall)
MORALE: Elite (15-16)
XP VALUE: 5 HD: 2000

5+ HD: 1000 per additional Hit Die

Shockers are inquisitive creatures from the Quasi-elemental
Plane of Lightning. They are extremely curious about the Prime
Material Plane and love to examine its native flora and fauna.

Shockers appear as shimmering suits of very unusual armor,
wreathed in crackling bursts of blue lightning. This flashing ef-
fect increases as the shocker approaches or is approached.

Combat: Due to their inquisitive and chaotic natures, shockers
are very unpredictable opponents. Indeed, their choice of tactics
and targets usually changes from round to round. Some sages
speculate that shockers do this in order to study the reactions of
their adversaries, as well as to confuse them.

The touch of a shocker does 3d4 hit points of electrical dam-
age to an opponent struck in melee combat. Those successfully
struck by such attacks are allowed no saving throw. Targets
wearing metal armor or carrying metal shields are treated as
having an AC of 10, although the appropriate Dexterity and
magical bonuses still apply. Shockers gain a +2 bonus to hit tar-
gets in plate mail, a +3 bonus against those in field plate, and a
+4 bonus against those wearing full plate armor.

Shockers can also discharge a bolt of lightning every other
round. This bolt is similar to the wizard spell, chain lightning, in
that the bolt will strike one object or creature initially and then
arc to a series of additional objects or creatures within range (40
yards). The bolt at first causes 1d8 points of damage per Hit Die
of the shocker at the time the bolt was fired. After striking the
first target, the bolt will jump to the next closest target, and then
the next, and so on. The bolt loses 1d8 of strength after every
jump until the bolt is exhausted. Successful saving throws vs.
breath weapon will reduce the damage inflicted to 50%. Each
time a shocker discharges its power during a combat, however,
it loses 1 Hit Die of power.

Shockers may only be struck by magical weapons, and have
an AC of 0 against missile fire and non-metallic weaponry.
However, against metal melee weapons, a shocker is treated as
having an AC of 10. Successful attacks with such weapons do
normal damage, but will discharge 3d4 points of electricity into
the user as well.

Shockers are allowed a saving throw against fire-based or

 

 

cold-based attacks. A successful save means that the shocker
takes no damage; failure indicates half damage from the attack.
Lightning, naturally enough, causes a shocker to grow in power
(add 1 Hit Die and the appropriate number of hit points for each
lightning-based attack used against it, up to a maximum of 10
HD). This effect also applies to the attacks of other shockers.
Indeed, one of their favored tactics is for several shockers to at-
tack and increase the abilities of one or two of their number.
These augmented versions, known as “shock troops,” make ex-
tremely formidable opponents.

Shockers are immune to any form of charm, sleep, or hold
spells. Poison and paralyzation also do not affect shockers.
Otherwise, they have a magic resistance of 50%. Water cast
upon a shocker merely increases the intensity of their arcing.

Habitat/Society: Shockers usually reside on the Quasi-elemental
Plane of Lightning, moving about in the frantic and chaotic
fashion normal to that realm. Travellers to the Plane of Light-
ning may be able to recruit guides from amongst the shockers,
due to their fascination with the Prime Material Plane.

Shockers will travel to the Prime Material Plane at every op-
portunity. Portals are sometimes accidentally opened during
very fierce electrical storms or by unwary wizards.

If a shocker is successfully slain, its armored form will col-
lapse into a pile of fine, inert dust. A few gems (1-4) ranging in
value from 50 to 1000 gp can usually be found as well. It is un-
known why these are in the body structure of a shocker, al-
though it is speculated that they provide some form of focusing
mechanism for the creature's energies.

Ecology: As guides on the Plane of Lightning, or servants on the
Prime Material Plane, shockers can be great assets. However,
their chaotic and unpredictable natures make them dangerous
and unreliable. Any dealings with a shocker are best concluded
quickly before the creature changes its mind.

The dusty remains of a shocker are preferred material in the
making of a wand of lightning.

©1992 TSA, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Spanner

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: None
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: See below
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: l

ARMOR CLASS: 0
MOVEMENT: 3

HIT DICE: 10-15
THACO: 11 (at 10 HD)
NO. OF ATTACKS: i
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 0

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: G (100’-200' long, 10’-30' wide)
MORALE; Fanatic (17-18)
XP VALUE: 5000 (10 HD) +1000 per HD above

10

Spanners, also called living bridges, were originally created to
help guard a certain wizard’s tower, but have since escaped into
the wilderness.

As implied by their name, these creature appear as large,
single-span stone arch bridges, complete with rails, posts and so
forth. The type of stone, stains, vine covering, and other details
will be appropriate for the local environment (see below). These
creatures are extremely difficult to differentiate from true
bridges. Only dwarves, or persons with engineering or stone-
mason talents, may be able to ascertain the identity of a span-
ner. In this instance, a successful Intelligence or appropriate
nonweapon proficiency check at a — 6 penalty is required before
the true nature of the bridge may be seen.

Combat: Spanners prefer not to attack if at all possible. They
are benign, even friendly, preferring to gossip and gather infor-
mation rather than attack. Being curious and intelligent crea-
tures, they will tolerate a fair amount of abuse as long as the
creatures around them are talking. However, if irked, or crossed
without permission, spanners are malicious and have no mercy.
If the victim is near the edge of the creature (within five feet of a
rail), the spanner will attempt to pitch him/her off the side;
otherwise, the spanner opens a hole through itself and under the
victim, In either instance, a Dexterity check at —4 is necessary
to avoid being removed from the bridge. The damage from this
attack will depend on the distance from the bridge to the land or
water below (1d6 damage per 10’ of falling, up 20d6 maximum,
with additional potential for drowning if the creature is span-
ning a waterway). These creatures locate potential enemies by
detecting their weight on its surface, or by feeling their vibra-
tions in the ground up to 150' away.

The spanner is intelligent enough to recognize that wildlife
may seek to cross the bridge, and that a talking bridge may scare
the creatures away. The spanner allows itself to be used in this
manner without attacking. It will not tolerate unnecessary hunt-
ing in its vicinity, if at all possible. Creatures who hunt for sport
and try to cross the spanner are automatically attacked.

Spanners are made of stone, and thus have an exceptional AC
of 0. Furthermore, they suffer only half damage from pointed or
edged weapons, while blunt weapons do full damage.

Spanners are also capable of using a stoneskin spell-like abili-

 

 

 

 

ty once per day, which protects them from 8 attacks.

Their Hit Dice are proportional to their length: 10 HD at 100’
long, with one additional HD per 20' length, up to a maximum
of 200' (15 HD). When killed, they simply cease to move, and
become normal, inanimate stone bridges.

The creatures do not value treasure as we know it. Any trea-
sure in their vicinity is from the bridge’s victims. Such treasure
often has suffered damage as a result of a fall from the bridge, or
may have been swept away by recent flooding of a river which
flows under the bridge.

Habitat/Society: Spanners are curious about anything and
everything. It is often possible to negotiate passage across a
spanner by simply talking to it and providing gossip, news, tri-
via, and so forth. However, they tend to be insufferable gossips
and liars.

To fit in with the local scenery, spanners will color themselves
with stains, add plant growth, assume the color of local stone,
or otherwise camouflage themselves.

No one is sure how spanners were introduced to the wild. It is
believed that they were originally created by a wizard’s experi-
ments with mimics, in an effort to create a creature to guard the
moats and chasms outside of his tower. The spanners learned
much from visitors who traveled through to see the wizard, in-
cluding how to move themselves around. They form pseudo-
pods which slowly (4 rounds) form into crude feet, which allow
ponderously sluggish movement at a rate of 3. They tend to re-
main in one place for years, but will move if they feel the local
people have found them out, or will no longer talk to them.

Spanners are constructed of stone and thus do not need to eat.
Spanners do not reproduce, and seem to have no natural limit to
their lifespans.

Ecology: Spanners generally are a boon to the surrounding nat-
ural community, as they demand nothing from it and punish
those who abuse it.
Stwinger

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any temperate
FREQUENCY: Common (Rare)
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE; Night

DIET: Herbivore
INTELLIGENCE: Highly (13-14)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1 (2-4)
ARMOR CLASS: 7
MOVEMENT: 6

HIT DICE: 3 Hit points
THACO: 20

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: Special
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: Ten -2')
MORALE: Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 12

Stwingers are tiny humanoid creatures with vestigial wings.
They are out to have fun, Stwingers are nauseatingly cute.

Combat: Stwingers are non-combatant creatures. Their sole aim
in life is to have fun. The most fun a stwinger can have is swing-
ing from a long beard, and thus they favor dwarves and other
bearded races as targets. Creatures with long hair are of second-
ary preference.

In “combat,” the stwinger will exude a pheromone that
charms all in a 40' radius, requiring a successful saving throw
vs. breath weapon to negate. Once it has charmed one or more
bearded or long-haired creatures, the stwinger will start its
game, swinging from one to the other, and causing 1 point of
damage per 2 melee rounds from pulling the hair too hard.

If at any time the “playmate’s” hit points fall below 50% of hit
points at the time of the encounter, he/she is allowed another
save, still at —4, to break the charm. Failure means the creature
will allow the stwinger to continue its game until its playmate
falls unconscious. Stwingers don't like to play with prone crea-
tures, so it is not possible for a stwinger to take any creature
below zero hit points. A creature reduced to zero hit points by
the stwinger is not dead, merely unconscious, as the damage is
really the equivalent of subdual damage.

Even creatures that make their saving throws have difficulty
in attacking the stwinger, due to its incredible cuteness. Before
attacking a stwinger, any adventurer must roll under their Cha-
risma on a d20, and then under their Constitution. If both of
these rolls are successful, the adventurer may attack. Attacks
which are meant to do no harm to the stwinger, such as pulling
the stwinger away from its playmate, are not hampered by the
stwinger's charm.

If its playmate’s companion(s) try to attack, the stwinger will
cast mirror image, which it can do up to three times per day, and
then try to escape. If a stwinger can be convinced that it is caus-
ing harm to its playmate(s), it may agree to leave them alone.

Habitat/Society: Stwingers prefer to live in warm, comfortable
dwellings, with soft furnishings and lots of luxuries. Most
stwinger dwellings have ropes, made from hair, dangling from
the ceiling, which the stwingers prize both for decoration and to
play on. They do not form communities, except once every

 

 

 

 

 

three years. On these occasions, all stwingers come together in a
“Great Meet,” where they trade ropes and choose mates. The
Great Meet lasts for ten days, after which each stwinger returns
to its solitary home.

On rare occasions a female stwinger will give birth to multiple
babies, rather than the more usual one. These babies have a tele-
pathic link to each other and when they are old enough to leave
home, at one year, they will build a communal dwelling. These
stwingers will stay together for their entire lives, and will al-
ways be found close to a large dwarven community. They will
visit the dwarves at least every second day, normally in the eve-
ning.

Stwingers are herbivorous, and prefer tubers and legumes
over other forms of vegetation. They do not grow any food,
preferring to gather it up from the wild or surrounding farms or
markets. They can survive on grasses during the winter months
if need be.

Stwingers can fly for very short distances, but they generally
do so only to leap from one playmate to the next. Having multi-
ple playmates is the most enjoyable form of their favorite game.

When seeking out playmates to swing on, stwingers will
range up to 3 miles from their home. This often means they
build two dwellings, one they call home, and the other for ex-
tended trips to wherever there are playmates.

Any hirsute creature which enters a stwinger’s territory is
considered a playmate. After all, why else would such a lovely
swing be near the stwinger’s home? Stwingers can speak Pixie,
Brownie, and Elvish. They have a rudimentary knowledge of
Dwarvish and Gnome.

Ecology: Stwingers have no need of treasure, except for their
ropes, which are not strong enough for humanoids to use. If a
stwinger's charm glands can be milked either while it is alive, or
within one hour of its death, the fluid can be used in the creation
of a philter of love.

©1992 TSR, Inc: All Rights Reserved

a,
 

Sussurus

MC14

 

 

~~ CLIMATE/TERRAIN:

Tropical or subtropical land

 

 

 

 

 

 

FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: X (P)
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1
ARMOR CLASS: 3
MOVEMENT: 15
HIT DICE: 10
THACO: 11
NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 3-18/3-18
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Impalement
-~ SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below
SIZE: L (7'-12' tall)
MORALE: Elite (15-16)
XP VALUE: 7000

Sussuri are distant cousins to the creatures known as shambling
mounds. They appear as headless humanoid piles of rotting
bamboo, moving about on all four limbs.

Combat: A sussurus is a deadly adversary and does not idly
challenge shamblers for the title of “most deadly form of plant
life known.” Its “forepaws” end in wickedly sharp bamboo
claws, which inflict 3d6 points of piercing damage each time
they hit. Even more terrifying is the fact that anyone unfortu-
nate enough to be struck by both forepaws in the same round is
crushed onto the bamboo spikes which cover the sussurus’ exo-
skeleton. Victims suffer an additional 3d8 points of damage
from this “hug.”

The interior of a sussurus is covered by an exoskeleton made
of several layers of decaying bamboo. This provides the crea-
ture with a formidable AC of 3. All weapons which strike a sus-
surus successfully only cause half the normal damage as the
force of the blows is reduced by passing through the various lay-
ers of rotting material.

Lightning does not harm sussuri but, unlike shambling
mounds, such attacks do not give the creature additional power
either. Fire and cold-based attacks against sussuri cause half or
no damage, depending upon whether or not the sussurus’ saving
throw was successful. Sussuri loathe fire and will immediately
attack anyone carrying a torch or lantern. Spellcasters who
make obvious use of fire-based magics are likewise assaulted.

Sussuri are susceptible to spells that affect plants, but with a
+2 bonus to their saving throws against such magics. It has been
reported, although never confirmed, that sussuri are also vulnera-
ble to warp wood spells (causing 3d10 points of damage).

A sussurus is able to inhale and exhale air through the numer-
ous tubes of bamboo which cover its surface, Such activity
causes the characteristic “dronesong” associated with the crea-
ture. This weird and eerie melody can have dire consequences
for unwary adventurers. Those hearing the dronesong must
save versus spells or fall into a deep sleep for 3d4 hours or until
they are physically attacked. Even certain types of undead crea-
tures (those with 4 HD or less) are affected by this strange mu-
sic. This phenomenon is known as “the sleep of the dead.” While
“asleep” the undead cannot be turned or destroyed, but will
awaken to defend themselves if attacked physically.

Sussuri are believed to have a life-span of over 1,000 years,

 

 

 

 

 

provided they are able to find sufficient food to sustain them. A
sussurus has no brain or vital organs to speak of. Its meager
intelligence and other life components are spread throughout a
decentralized system located deep within its exoskeleton. There-
fore, amputating wounds do not harm a sussurus at all. As one
“limb” is lost, the remaining mass of the creature joins together
to form a new limb by the next combat round. Only when
enough damage has penetrated through the tough exoskeleton
will a sussurus die. Even then, if its remains are left in a collec-
tive heap, a sussurus will return to life in 2d6 hours. Such sus-
suri are extremely weak (1d8 hit points) and will seek to return
to their dank lairs, there to heal and nurse their rage.

A sussurus “sees” and “hears” by detecting air disturbances
through its tube-riddled exoskeleton, Therefore, a sussurus is
immune to all forms of magic which affect or rely upon sight or
hearing. Sussuri can also detect the presence of invisible objects
or beings in this manner.

Sussuri are nearly invisible (—3 penalty to an opponent's sur-
prise rolls) within clumps of bamboo or large growths of reeds.
Sussuri wait in such places for other creatures to come near.
They will then either rush out for a direct assault or begin their
dronesong in an effort to first subdue the beings, Many a party
has perished for choosing a camp site too close to the lair of a
sussurus.

Habitat/Society: Similar to their shambler cousins, sussuri are
only found in warm regions of heavy rainfall and vegetation.
Dense clumps of bamboo or other reed-like plants are the fa-
vored lairs of a sussurus.

Despite their solitary nature, sussuri have been known to
communicate to each other by means of slight and subtle varia-
tions in their dronesong. However, it is only very rarely that
two or more sussuri are close enough to communicate in this
manner.

Ecology: Sussuri often compete with shambling mounds for ter-
ritory and prey, thus most sussuri attack shamblers on sight.
Symbiotic Jelly

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Subterranean
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Special
INTELLIGENCE: Semi- (2-4)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 8
MOVEMENT: 1

HIT DICE: 2

THACO: 19

NO, OF ATTACKS: Nil
DAMAGE/ATTACK: Nil

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: T (2"-3" diameter)
MORALE: Steady (12-14)
XP VALUE: 270

Symbiotic jelly is a distant cousin of the gelatinous cube. It oc-
cupies a very special ecological niche, and thus has a specific but
rather unusual mode of existence. It exists by controlling the
mind of another creature, which it then uses for protection and
to obtain sustenance.

These jellies are difficult to spot due to their small size (about
2"-3" diameter), Their appearance is similar to that of a jelly-
fish: yellow, spherical or slightly flattened globules. Radiating
outwards from the central mass are about three dozen thin tend-
rils, which act as antennae from which the creature communi-
cates with and controls another creature (see below). They are
translucent and slightly milky, but contain no fixed internal
structure.

Combat: These creatures choose unoccupied caves in which to
dwell, and stick to the ceiling in the shadows, where they are
almost impossible to detect. When a carnivore ventures into the
cave, the symbiotic jelly will attempt to use its innate charm
monster ability to persuade the intruder telepathically to remain
in the cave and attack any other creature which enters. Mon-
sters which are not carnivorous, creatures from planes other
than the Prime Material, and undead are ignored by the jelly.
The jelly then uses another powerful spell-like ability, similar to
a veil spell. Two vivid illusions are thus created, The first illu-
sion makes the charmed monster appear to be a much weaker
variety of the same beast, while the second creates an inviting
but illusory treasure in the cave. The nature of the treasure will
be determined as the symbiotic jelly uses an ESP-like power to
detect the victim's interest in the cave. The ESP is also used to
determine the victim's response to the illusions, so that the jelly
can quickly alter the illusion for greater believability. This ad-
justment occurs so rapidly, within a fraction of a second, that
the viewer of the illusion is unaware of the subtle changes which
have taken place. Creatures observing the illusions (except the
charmed monster) will fail to recognize these as such, unless
they save vs. spell at a penalty of —7. Thus, if a huge cave bear
is charmed, it may be made to appear as a weak bear cub, while

 

 

 

 

the back of the cave might appear to contain a rich vein of gold
ore if a dwarf entered the cave, or a sumptuous banquet if a
hungry halfling wandered by.

The symbiotic jelly gains sustenance by draining energy from
a carnivorous creature which is feeding. This energy drain is
done from a distance of about ten feet from the feeding site. If
the intruder is killed by the creature the jelly has charmed, the
jelly will drain power through the creature as it eats. If the
charmed creature loses the battle, the jelly will attempt to charm
the victor and persuade it to replace the former occupant. This
peculiar diet is the reason for the jelly’s unique behavior. It is
believed that the jelly feeds on the emotions derived from satis-
fying the instinctual urge to eat.

The symbiotic jelly's communication tendrils are fragile, but
regenerate quickly, within 1-3 turns per tendril destroyed. If any
tendrils are damaged, there is a proportional decrease in the
chance to communicate with the host creature. Thus, if 6 of the
36 tendrils are destroyed, there is a 6 in 36 chance (1 in 6) that
communication will be severed, and the control of the host crea-
ture will be lost.

Habitat/Society: If a symbiotic jelly does not eat for one month,
it forms a shell-like, protective coating around itself and enters a
dormant stage. It will hibernate until a carnivore enters the cave
and the charm process can begin. Thus, a symbiotic jelly who
has charmed a cave bear will generally be dormant during the
winter when the bear hibernates.

Ecology: Symbiotic jellies are not well-studied. Because of their
extreme rarity, they have few known magical or commercial ap-
plications. It has been reported that the distilled essence of a
symbiotic jelly may be useful in certain magical applications,
including potions which emulate this creature's symbiotic life-
style, The role of a symbiotic jelly in its local ecosystem has not
yet been determined. It is known that its intelligence is instinctu-
al, not learned.

©1992 TSR, Inc. All Fights Reserved

—..
 

Terithran

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Ethereal Plane (see below)

FREQUENCY: Very Rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivorous

INTELLIGENCE: Average (8)

TREASURE: Various discharged magical items,
mostly useless

ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1

 

 

 

ARMOR CLASS: 3 (6 Ethereal Plane)

MOVEMENT: 15 (18 Ethereal Plane)

HIT DICE: 5+1

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-5/2-5

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See Below

SPECIAL DEFENSES: __ Hit only by silver or magical weap-
ons

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 50%

SIZE: S (4' Tall)

MORALE: Steady (11)

XP VALUE: 275

The terithran is a short (4’ tall) humanoid creature with long
sinewy arms, a disproportionately large and misshapen head,
and clawlike hands and feet. In its home on the Ethereal Plane, it
is a scaly greenish-gray creature, but when it ventures to the
Prime Material Plane it has only a faint shadowy appearance.
Most terithrans speak only their own language, although some
do speak Common as well (15% chance.)

Combat: The terithran fights mainly to eat, and its favorite food
is spellcasters from the Prime Material Plane. In normal melee
on the Prime Material Plane, the terithran fights with two claws
for 2-5 hit points of damage each, but it will avoid this type of
combat in favor of its unique magical powers.

The terithran may detect magic at will. In addition, the
terithran has the following four magical powers, any combina-
tion of which it may use up to six times daily: Stunning Blast:
This is a blast of ether that has the same effects as the 7th-level
wizard spell power word, stun on all creatures within a 10’ radi-
us. It is negated by a successful saving throw vs. magic. Drain
Power: Removes all knowledge of the current day's spells from a
wizard; it is negated by a successful saving throw vs. breath
weapons. If the terithran’s attack is successful, the wizard must
then rest and study his spell book in the normal manner to re-
cover his spells. Cause Serious Wounds: As the 4th-level priest
spell, activated by touch (a normal attack roll is required); there
is no saving throw. The touch of the terithran does not automat-
ically cause serious wounds; it must be using that power during
that specific melee round. If a successful attack is made, the
claw damage also applies. Transportation: Transports the
terithran and one other person to the terithran’s lair on the Ethe-
real Plane. The victim must first be grasped (treat as a normal
hit with two claws; if one or both score a successful hit the vic-
tim has been grasped). There is no saving throw.

When a terithran encounters adventurers, its prime objective
is to grasp its target spell-user and transport the victim back to
the Ethereal Plane. It will thus reserve one of its six power usag-
es for transportation. If it fails its grasp, and the melee is going
against it, it will transport alone to escape.

If the creature is encountered in its lair on the Ethereal Plane,
its claws will do 1d8+1 hit points of damage each. There it is

 

 

 

 

 

 

allowed 16 power uses per day, rather than six, and its stunning
blast inflicts 1d6 +1d8 of damage.

Habitat/Society: The terithran is a solitary creature. Protective
of its “hunting grounds” (those areas of the Ethereal Plane that
correspond to areas of the Prime Material Plane which are rich
in magical energy) the terithran keeps to itself and its own terri-
tory, except when the mating urge is upon it. Only rarely (5%)
will more than one terithran be encountered. Terithran young
are tended by the mother for six months, and then ejected from
the mother’s lair to fend for themselves.

The terithran’s main diet is wizards from the Prime Material
Plane, mainly because wizards are such easy prey once the
terithran has drained away their spells. The terithran stalks wiz-
ards by detecting the magical swirls and eddies on the Ethereal
Plane which are caused by the use of large amounts of magic on
the Prime Material Plane. Any sufficiently high-level wizard
spell use will attract it (10% chance from a 7th-level spell, 20%
for an 8th-level, 30% for a 9th-level, etc.). Priest magic will not
attract it, but wizard spells cast by a high-level ranger will. Cu-
mulative spell use, within a 60’x60' area, of 16 spell levels or
more during consecutive rounds, (ie. a 6th-, another 6th-, then a
4th-level spell cast over three rounds) will also catch its atten-
tion, as will the use of charged magical items in three consecu-
tive rounds, Note that cumulative spell use and charged magical
item use may be from different characters or monsters.

There is a 35% chance that any of the above will lure a
terithran to the Prime Material Plane. The terithran will materi-
alize on the Prime Material Plane in the area of the creature(s)
responsible for the magical discharge, within 1d10’. It will then
attempt to power drain any wizard it finds and take him/her
back to the Ethereal Plane to be eaten.

Ecology: The terithran is thought to be a tasty treat by most
dracolisks. For this reason, once terithrans have secured a safe
lair on the Ethereal Plane, they very seldom venture from it.
Thunder Children

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

     
 
 

  

 

MC14
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate/any 7 ; OK G
FREQUENCY: Rare VEN. NG OK
ORGANIZATION: Group \N “ \ —\ Y\
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night and/or storms \\ WY ‘ \
DIET: Fear SN REAR CC JAG S .
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10) NN ~ \
TREASURE: F SA SS YY
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil \ \\ Ww LS \
NO. APPEARING: 1-6 “ Ys je \S .
ARMOR CLASS: ~I fe ws
MOVEMENT: 6, F118 (A) \ << &
HIT DICE as
THACO: 14 \\\ \" . \s «
NO, OF ATTACKS: 1 CWS es SAK
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-16 Ww \
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below ste ANS ‘ PRS
SPECIAL DEFENSES: +1 or better weapon to hit << : NC ‘ SS
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil Sa” SS AX.
SIZE: S (4" high) XS e Ka
MORALE: Average (10) iy SS \
XP VALUE: 2000 \ <

Thunder children, also known as storm children, night rattlers,
and lightning-kin, are mischievous, malicious creatures that
come out to “play” during violent thunderstorms, especially at
night. This play is quite harmful to other creatures.

These “children” are shiny black, gaunt humanoids, with
slender limbs and vestigial wings. Their faces are human,
though they have tiny horns on their temples and pointed ears.
Thunder children have pupil-less eyes that flash like lightning.

Thunder children have their own language, which consists of
crackles, howls, and booms. Many also speak Common, and
are experts at mimicking normal sounds such as squeaking
doors, heavy footfalls, and the like.

Combat: Thunder children fight in several ways. The most sim-
ple and direct is the bite from their unusually strong, fanged
mouths. In addition to taking 2-16 hit points of damage, the vic-
tim must make a save vs. spell, Failing the roll inflicts an addi-
tional 10 points of electrical damage.

Each thunder child can also cast the following wizard spells at
seventh-level proficiency: chain lightning (which comes from
the eyes), gust of wind, fog cloud, darkness 15’ radius. Each
spell may be cast seven times per day, though only one spell may
be in effect at any given time.

Thunder children can also sense fear in a 120’ radius, and
change into gaseous form, resembling a small black storm
cloud.

The most ingenious manner in which a thunder child attacks
is by subtle, psychological ways. During violent storms, thun-
der children delight in loosening doors and windows, banging
shutters, flinging small outdoor objects about, and doing other
things which heighten their victims’ unease over the storm. The
victims’ fear is what feeds the thunder children.

Any round in which a thunder child attempts to frighten its
victim, the victim must save vs. paralyzation. Failure indicates
that the victim is overcome with fright, and loses one point of
Wisdom, drained by the thunder child. When the victim's Wis-
dom reaches 0, he/she dies of fright, unless he/she makes a suc-
cessful save vs. death magic. Victims who survive can regain
their Wisdom points at a rate of one every 12 hours.

Thunder children can also move silently and hide in shadows,
each at a 70% ability. They are also immune to fear, Thunder

i es

Ss

\
|
Ss

children have infravision 120’, and can even see through magi-
cal darkness,

Habitat/Society: Thunder children dwell in little caves hollowed
out from storm clouds. These clouds have been magically rein-
forced in much the same way that a cloud giant's clouds can sup-
port a castle. The lairs have no treasure, since thunder children
have no interest in such things.

There are no sexes among the thunder children. They repro-
duce by flying into storm clouds and getting hit by lightning. If
the creature makes its save vs. magic, a half-strength thunder
child is born just as the thunderclap from the lightning bolt is
heard. If the creature fails its save, it dies. The “new” thunder
child matures in six months. Any thunder child lair encountered
has a 10% chance of having 1d4+1 young.

Thunder children have no leaders. They act together because
it is advantageous to do so, though sometimes a solitary “child”
will delight in having some private sport with a victim.

Places that are especially gloomy, such as old graveyards,
moldy mansions, and dark castles on a sea cliffside, are the fa-
vorite haunts of thunder children. Any place that inspires fear in
humans, demi-humans or humanoids is an ideal place for a
thunder child,

Thunder children who find their way to Ravenloft adore it. In
that shadowy realm, a thunder child feels like it has arrived at
its vision of Paradise.

Ecology: Due to their capricious nature, thunder children have
many enemies. Among those enemies are djinn, air elementals,
cloud giants, storm giants, and pegasi. Storm giants and cloud
giants call them “thunder bats”, and consider them as much of a
nuisance as humans consider rats in their house.

It is rumored that the blood of a thunder child is a useful in-
gredient in some recipes for potions of gaseous form and potions
of weather control (as per the 7th-level priest spell, although this
potion is believed to still be only a theoretical possibility).

©7992 TSA, Inc. All Rights Reserved
 

Troll, Ice

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate or Arctic but always near
water

FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Tribal

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)

TREASURE; Q(D)

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic Evil

NO. APPEARING: 2-12

ARMOR CLASS: 8

MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 2

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2 —_

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-8/1-8

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: L (8' Tall)

MORALE: Steady (11)

XP VALUE; 175

The ice troll is a smaller, more intelligent relative of the normal
troll, and is probably the result of magical experimentation. It
closely resembles its more common cousin, but has semi-
transparent, very cold skin. Ice trolls are famous for being cun-
ning, evil creatures which keep humans and demi-humans as
livestock.

Because ice trolls need water to regenerate, they never leave
their lake or river, and will create elaborate traps to lure their
prey to them.

Combat: Ice trolls are organized and intelligent enough to know
their weaknesses, and will rarely start a fight at a disadvantage.
Unlike their larger and less intelligent cousins, they will not
wade into combat blindly, but will often try to pick off weaker
opponents one by one, hoping to bring back live prey.

Ice trolls will generally attack with their claws for 1d8 hit
points of damage each, but have been known to use weapons on
rare occasions (10%), at an additional +4 to each weapon's
damage due to the high Strength of the troll. Attacks may be
directed against different opponents.

The regenerative powers of the ice troll are not as great as
normal trolls. An ice troll must be immersed in water to be able
to regenerate 2 hit points per melee round. The creatures will
often make their stand in a shallow pool of water to keep this
advantage. Ice trolls reduced to zero hit points do not die, but
rather fall to the ground to regain lost hit points.

Because of the thin brittle nature of the ice troll, it is possible
to sever one of the creature's limbs with an edged weapon. On a
natural “to hit" roll of 20 with an edged weapon, one limb will
be severed. Severed limbs will also regenerate 2 hit points per
turn, as long as they are immersed in water. If a severed limb is
not in contact with water, it will move up to 30 feet in search of
water, and will always move toward it if it is in range. If a sev-
ered limb cannot join the main body of the Ice Troll within 24
hours, the limb dies. This is of little concern to the ice troll, since
it is able to regenerate any lost body parts within a week as long
as it stays in contact with water.

Fire and acid are the only attack forms which will negate the
ice troll’s ability to regenerate. If an ice troll is reduced to zero
hit points, and then burned by either acid or fire, it dies without

 

 

 

 

chance for regeneration. Because of the ice troll's physiology,
fire-based attacks do double damage. Ice trolls are totally unaf-
fected by cold or cold-based spells, and because of their magical
nature, can only be hit by magical weapons or missiles.

As previously stated, ice trolls will often defend their camps
by wading in ankle-deep water and attacking from this pool.
They frequently lay nets across the floor of these pools to cap-
ture or at least entangle their attackers.

Habitat/Society: Ice trolls live in groups of 6-12 in arctic and
sub-arctic regions, near open water. Because they are smaller
and less resilient than their larger cousins, they have developed
a higher sense of cooperation to stay alive. Each group has a
leader, usually the most intelligent ice troll. Leaders are respon-
sible for keeping the group safe and well-fed.

Ice trolls live near settled regions, hoping to waylay and cap-
ture humans and demi-humans. Ice trolls will frequently bait
traps for adventurers, using treasure they have salvaged from
previous groups. Settlements also provide more common live-
stock, which although less preferable than human flesh, is con-
sidered edible in times of want.

Ice troll lairs always are near a lake or running river. Here the
ice trolls will have gathered all their treasure, as well as 5-20
human or demi-human captives. These individuals are kept
well-fed on grains and vegetables, so that the ice trolls need nev-
er go too long without food.

Ice trolls mate in the spring and give birth to one baby ice troll
in the late fall. When an ice troll group gets too large, it will
split, with one group wandering off to find a new lair.

Ecology: Ice trolls that live in arctic regions will sometimes go
hunting for remorhaz, and will even pick off a solitary frost gi-
ant.

Ice troll blood is frequently used in the manufacture of frost
brand swords, and rings of cold resistance.
 

Tween

MC14

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any
FREQUENCY: Very Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivorous
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

 

NO. APPEARING:

1 (10% chance 1-3)

 

 

 

ARMOR CLASS: 10

MOVEMENT: Variable

HIT DICE: 1

THACO: 20

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 (on Ethereal Plane only)
DAMAGE/ATTACK: By weapon

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil

SPECIAL DEFENSES: _ Etherealness

MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: S (3’)/Special (see below)
MORALE: Special (see below)

XP VALUE: 17

A tween is a parasitic creature from the Ethereal Plane. On its
home plane it appears as a short, squat, ugly humanoid form
with stubby arms and legs, and no neck. On the Prime Material
Plane, a tween appears as a smoky or shadowy outline within
six feet of whichever being it has chosen as its “host.”

Combat: The tween can only attack or be attacked on the Ethe-
real Plane, or by means such as applying oil of etherealness to a
blade. If such a melee occurs, the tween will fight with a weapon,
usually a sword. The tween has no attack abilities on the Prime
Material Plane, and indeed has little need to defend itself there.

The tween has the ability to see a few seconds into the future,
and may communicate this future-sight subliminally to its host.
The tween is also able to move relatively light material things
short distances, reacting with such speed that it can affect the
movement of a weapon in melee. For example, it can reposition
its host's sword so that it hits rather than misses. As a result, any
character or creature with a tween “partner” gets two die rolls
instead of one, whenever a die roll is called for, using the more
advantageous of these rolls. This applies to all die rolls: attack
rolls, damage rolls, saving throws, etc. This gives the tween's
host the appearance of being very “lucky” to any who are not
aware that the character is infested with a tween.

While a tween has an obvious beneficial effect on the actions
of its host, it has the reverse effect on any other creature, friend
or foe, within 50’ of the host. While the tween appears to bestow
luck upon its host, its parasitic nature absorbs luck from all
those nearby. Two die rolls are made for all characters/ monsters
within a 50' radius whenever a die roll is called for, and the less
advantageous is selected, A character with a tween partner is
therefore something of a curse to any companions, and usually
ends up as an outcast from any adventuring party who knows
of his infestation.

Habitat/Society: Because of the tween's squat and somewhat ug-
ly natural appearance on the Ethereal Plane, it is considered by
most other denizens to be among the lowest form of life residing

 

 

 

 

 

there, and it is shunned by all other residents, even other
tweens. For that reason, most tweens choose to infest a being on
the Prime Material Plane and live vicariously through them,
deserting their own solitary lives on the Ethereal Plane.

In selecting a host, a tween will prefer an intelligent being,
human or near-human, but they have no particular preference
for adventurers. After several hours with a new host, a tween
will gradually assume the general shape and characteristics of
that host, who will appear to have a “shadow” nearby. Once a
host has been selected, a tween will remain permanently until
the host or the tween dies. Neither tween nor host are able to
voluntarily sever the bond. If the host of a tween dies, the shock
and grief of losing its host will literally cause the tween to split in
two, causing the birth of a new tween. Both tweens then will
usually begin looking for new hosts, the “old” tween almost im-
mediately, and the “new” tween as soon as it finds out how mis-
erable its life as a tween on the Ethereal Plane can be.

A tween eats just about anything it can find while alone on
the Ethereal Plane without a Prime Material Plane host; after it
secures a host, it feeds on the “luck” of those surrounding its
host, Its form remains on the Ethereal Plane and no longer needs
typical sustenance.

Ecology: The tween has no natural enemies on the Ethereal
Plane, nor does it have any friends; therefore, most tweens will
find and secure a Prime Material Plane host shortly after birth.

There are rumors about some magical research that has been
done on the nature of tweens—more specifically, on how to sep-
arate a tween from its host without the death of one or the other,
A wish spell has been proven effective, and experiments have
been done with combining dispel magic, remove curse, and
plane shift, but thus far the results of these experiments have
been disastrous. An amulet of proof against detection and loca-
tion will usually discourage a tween from infesting a character
in the first place. The tween prefers to choose an intelligent host,
and it cannot gauge a being's Intelligence in the presence of such
an amulet.

©1997 TSR, Inc All Rights Reserved
 

Umpleby

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: — Temperate/Forest
FREQUENCY: Very Rare
ORGANIZATION: Clan

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Herbivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7) (but see below)
TREASURE: See below
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1-3

ARMOR CLASS: 4

MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 6

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: l
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Electric Shock
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Immune to electrical-type attacks
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: L (8° Tall)
MORALE: Very Steady (14)
XP VALUE: 420

The umpleby is an eight foot tall, 400 pound walking mound of
wild, straggly brown hair. Lips and eyes can be discerned on its
face, but every other part of its body is covered with fur.

When encountered in its native temperate forest areas, the
umpleby will neither attack nor try to hide, but just stand stu-
pidly and stare.

Combat: The umpleby will fight to defend itself if attacked, but
will usually not fight either for or against an adventuring party.
When it does attack, it strikes for 1d4 hit points of damage with
its hands.

The umpleby stores large quantities of static electricity in its
body. Each day, it can deliver a total of 50 hit points of electrical
damage by simply touching its victim. A normal attack roll is
required unless a victim is unsuspecting. Metal armor of any
type is treated as AC 10 with regard to this attack, though ap-
propriate magical and Dexterity bonuses still apply. The umple-
by may deliver all 50 hit points in one strike, or can regulate the
amount of damage it inflicts, usually conducting 9-16 hit points
of damage. When it delivers the 50th hit point of damage, the
umpleby immediately goes to sleep, and recharges its static elec-
tricity supply at the following rates:

Less than 1 hour of sleep: 4d4 points static damage.
1-4 hours sleep: 25 points static damage.
4-8 hours sleep: 37 points static damage.
8+ hours sleep: 50 points static damage

The umpleby often makes nets out of its own hair and stores
them by wrapping them around its waist. It can throw such a
net 30' with the accuracy of a short-range arrow. It will only use
its nets or its electrical attacks if threatened. The creature is, of
course, immune to attacks of an electrical nature.

Habitat/Society: The umpleby is a rather stupid creature. It has
no organized society of which to speak. Umplebys are solitary
creatures by nature; they simply have too short an attention
span to be interested in forming a community. Occasionally a
male and female umpleby may encounter each other in the for-
est, and band together just long enough to bear a baby umpleby.
This couple will stay together until the “baby” wanders off one
day and doesn't come back, and then they will lose interest in
each other and wander off themselves. No more than three um-
plebys have ever been seen together at a time. Umplebys usually

 

 

 

inhabit caves or holes dug into the earth or into sides of hills.
They are primarily vegetarians, eating berries and fruits from
the trees, but if befriended by an adventuring party they will eat
most anything that is given to them.

Umplebys love shiny and sparkling treasure and can detect
large amounts of precious metal and gems (more than 1,000
coins and/or 50 gems) up to 100’ feet away, even through solid
rock, Indeed, these shiny objects are among the few items which
will hold an umpleby’s attention for any duration. In its Jair it
keeps a huge treasure trove of these items, but it will never re-
veal the location of its lair, even if threatened with death
(though charm monster may possibly overcome this reluc-
tance.)

On meeting a party of adventurers, the umpleby will simply
shamble along with them, neither helping their endeavors nor
willing to be left behind, constantly getting in their way, and
apparently incapable of moving in silence. The umpleby can
speak the Common tongue in a halting fashion, but will rarely
do so and is in general an uncommunicative creature. However,
an offer of food and water will assure instant and total loyalty
to its benefactor, as it is incessantly hungry and thirsty. It will
also be willing to help and advise him/her. This loyalty will on-
ly be broken if the benefactor does not reward the umpleby with
a reasonable proportion of any coins or gems discovered as a
result of its advice. If, in its opinion, it is insufficiently compen-
sated, the umpleby will leave the party. If the party pursues the
creature, it will refuse to cooperate in any way with any of
them.

Ecology: The umpleby’s hair is very tough, and is 50% more
difficult to cut, break or burn than the cords of a magical web.
An intact umpleby net can bring as much as 100 gp.

Because of the umpleby’s ability to shock its enemies, very
few creatures bother to tangle with them, except blue dragons,
which venture out of their desert homes to enjoy an umpleby as
a light snack. Umplebys regard volts as particularly horrid
pests.
 

Urdunnir

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Underground
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Clan

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Special
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)
TREASURE: M, Q (H, R(TS)10)
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 10-100

ARMOR CLASS: 0

MOVEMENT: 6, Br 6 (see below)
HIT DICE: zZ

THACO: 20

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4

 

 

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 25%

SIZE: M (41/2' and taller)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)

XP VALUE: 975

Leader 2,000

A long-forgotten dwarven offshoot, Urdunnir means “ore-
cutter” in their language, which is closely related to standard
Dwarven. A speaker of one language can understand about
75% of the other. Dwarven legends state that urdunnirin are
specially blessed by Dumathoin.

Urdunnirin look very much like mountain dwarves. Their skin
tends to be light gray, while their long beards and mustaches
range from light gray to dark gray. Their eyes are silver. Urdun-
nirin take very good care of their facial hair, but otherwise pay
little attention to grooming. Females do not have facial hair.

Urdunnirin usually wear a tight-fitting, one-piece garment
composed of stone and/or metal. The urdunnirin use their in-
nate abilities to make these garments flexible. Only the leaders
of the urdunnirin wear garments made completely of metal.

Combat: Urdunnirin rarely attack other creatures, though they
will defend their homes, families, and treasure hoards to the
best of their abilities.

Each urdunnir has the ability to pass into and through stone
and earth as if it were air. This ability adapts well to ambush,
allowing the urdunnir a —3 penalty to opponents’ surprise rolls.
Urdunnirin are also able to move other objects through stone
with them, Up to twice the urdunnir's body weight can be trans-
ported in such a manner. For the urdunnir to use this ability of-
fensively, the urdunnir must make a successful attack roll to
grab its victim, who is then allowed a saving throw vs. petrifica-
tion to break free. If the saving throw fails, the urdunnir may
transport all or part of the victim's body into the earth or stone,
and then release him/her. The victim's body then binds with the
earth, resulting in death. Only a wish will reverse such a death.

During any round that an urdunnir is passing through stone,
a phase door spell will instantly kill it.

Urdunnir also have an innate stone shape ability. Once per
round, they can affect up to eight cubic feet of stone as per the
spell. Casting time is only one segment, and no spell compo-
nents are required. Urdunnir lairs often have several ingenious
traps designed to take advantage of this power.

If an urdunnir concentrates for a full round, he/she may shape
metal in the next round. Up to five cubic feet of metal can be af-
fected per use. If an urdunnir uses this power on metal carried or
worn by another individual, an attack roll is required. If an ur-

 

 

 

 

isu) @

dunnir is prepared for an attack from a metal weapon, he/she can
shape it as it hits, taking only half damage and rendering the
weapon useless. Magical weapons and armor save against this
power at their user's level. If all else fails, urdunnirin attack with
their fists, doing 1d4 damage per hit. They never use weapons.

An urdunnir leader, an “alird"” or gold Jord, will be encoun-
tered with 20 or more normal urdunnirin. Alirds wear silver or
gold garments and have 3 HD and an Armor Class of —2, They
do not need to concentrate for a full round to shape metal.

Urdunnirin are resistant to poisons, gaining a +4 to saving
throws vs. such attacks.

Habitat/Society: When the dwarven race was young, the god
Dumathoin grew angry that they burrowed into his mountains,
taking the riches he had hidden in the earth. Though he soon
began to take pleasure in the creations they made, there was a
time when he was very upset. During this time, he created the
urdunnir race from certain mountain dwarves, and hid them far
away from the other dwarves. The urdunnirin, with their ability
to pass through stone, could hunt for ores and gems without
destroying the mountains. Dwarven legends still tell of this lost
race, which they call “sonsamman,” or stone-friend.

Urdunnirin use their abilities to collect ore and gems from the
earth, and to shape those riches. Their lairs are decorated with
many statues and fantastic works of gold and other precious
metals.

Like dwarves, urdunnirin have a clan-based society, with
each clan specializing in finding and shaping a certain sub-
stance. Known clans include Marble, Gold, and Ruby.

Ecology: Urdunnirin do not live on normal foods, eating gems
instead. Dumathoin provides each settlement of urdunnirin
with a self-replenishing supply of precious stones solely for eat-
ing. The urdunnirin guard these sources to the death.

Urdunnirin are great enemies of the xorn, which often attack
them. They will kill xorn on sight.

©1992 TSA, Inc. All Rights Reserved
 

Volt

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical or temperate land
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Herd

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Electricity and blood
INTELLIGENCE: Animal (1)
TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 2-24

ARMOR CLASS: 3

MOVEMENT: 0, Fl 6 (D)

HIT DICE: i

THACO: 19

NO, OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK;: 1-4

 

 

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Electrified tail stinger, blood drain
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Immune to electrical attacks
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: S (about 2' diameter)

MORALE: Steady (11)

XP VALUE: 420

Volts are curious little creatures, but bad-tempered and danger-
ous, These spherical animals hunt by sensing the electrical im-
pulses of their prey. Volts are often found in or around areas of
violent thunderstorm activity.

Volts appear as nearly-spherical bundles of bristly grey hair.
They see with two huge bulbous eyes on the top of their slightly-
flattened bodies. They also possess two small curved horns just
above their mouths. These mouths resemble suckers, and are
full of tiny teeth, like the mouth of an eel. A 3’ long, naked tail
provides for balance while in flight. At the business end of the
tail is a barbed stinger and an electricity-producing organ. Volts
are surrounded by a faint blue electrical aura which is only visi-
ble in low-light conditions (torchlight, moonlight, or complete
darkness). Furthermore, their bodies give off a curious, low
humming sound, which can only be heard under the quietest of
conditions. It has also been reported that small arcs of electricity
snap and sizzle their way through the hairs of some individuals
(5% chance).

Combat: Volts locate prey by detecting electrical impulses, such
as nerve activity. Creatures with more complex nervous systems
are attacked first, while creatures with less active nerve impulses
(i.e., plant forms) or none at all (i.e., golems) are ignored.

To attack, the volt first propels itself toward the intended vic-
tim and attempts to bite its neck, or other readily reachable
body surface, for 1-4 points of damage. A successful bite indi-
cates that the volt has firmly attached itself to the victim's neck
and cannot be detached until the victim or the volt is dead. Suc-
tion tendrils then snake out from the volt's mouth, so that it may
drain blood from the victim for an addition 1-4 points of dam-
age per round that it is attached.

Once attached, the volt will also lash out with its
electrically-charged tail stinger, which hits automatically. A
hit by the stinger results in 2-12 additional points of damage.
A small percentage of the volt population (5%) may feed on
the victim's nervous energy instead of blood. In this case, the
mouth tendrils inflict 2-16 points of damage per round. After
the volt is detached, this damage is recovered at a rate of 1
point per turn.

Volts tend to be rather touchy creatures, and will often attack
any or all creatures present for no apparent reason.

Aik 4s
LG
SS

 

Habitat/Society: Volts float by employing magic similar to that
of a levitation spell, Mobility is provided by rapidly twitching
the long tail, similar to the way in which a snake swims. Volts
are rather slow and clumsy, moving at a rate of 6, and with ma-
neuverability class D. They may be found close to the ground if
hunting, or high in the air if thunderstorms are near.

Volts are drawn towards lightning sources (thunderstorms,
lightning bolt spells, etc.) and tend to be more aggressive
around such electrical discharges. During these times, but no
more than once per year, they may reproduce by a sudden
bright discharge of electrical energy. After 2 rounds, the crack-
ling discharge coalesces into an immature volt. These immature
volts (sometimes referred to as microvolts) stay near the light-
ning source, for they will become mature adults only if struck
by lightning. Immature volts can survive for no more than 6
hours, and if not struck by lightning during that time, they will
wither and die.

Lightning also mends 2-8 points of damage suffered by adult
volts, while lesser electrical discharges such as the shocking
grasp spell do not affect them. Volts drink blood so that they
may extract substances from it (mostly salt) to charge their elec-
trical organs.

Volt herds are led by a single creature who has been able to
drain the blood (and thus the power) of other competing crea-
tures of the same herd. The leader has 3 Hit Dice and AC 2, but
is otherwise identical to other volts. The herd does not stay in or
defend any particular territory, but rather follows weather
fronts which have the promise of thunderstorm activity. The
herds are most often found wherever and whenever thunder-
storm activity is at a peak.

Ecology: Sages are unsure of the exact role of volts in the lands
where they dwell. It is suspected that the electrical aura which
surrounds them at all times helps to initiate thunderstorms. If
the electrical organ is properly harvested from a dead volt, it
can be useful in the creation of a wand of lightning.
 

Xill

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Ethereal Plane; Any Land
FREQUENCY: Very Rare
ORGANIZATION: Clan

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Very

TREASURE: Cc

ALIGNMENT: Lawful Evil

NO. APPEARING: 1-6

ARMOR CLASS: 0

MOVEMENT: 15

HIT DICE: 5

THACO: 12 (10 with missiles)

NO. OF ATTACKS: 4

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4/1-4/1-4/1-4 or by weapon type
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Paralysis, subdual, see below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Etherealness, see below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 70% (but see below)
SIZE: M (4' tall)

MORALE: Elite (15)

XP VALUE: 3000

Xill are creatures who have the ability to travel through the
Ethereal Plane to hunt on the Prime Material Plane for human
hosts to hatch their young.

They are short, brawny bipeds with bright red skin and four
arms, all of which are capable of wielding weapons simultane-
ously. Xill are asexual, and have one apparent aim in life: repro-
duction. They lay their eggs inside the human stomach. These
eggs grow using the food taken in by their “hosts” until the time
that they hatch.

Combat: Xill have the power of etherealness. They have the
ability to transfer from the Ethereal Plane to the Prime Material
Plane in five seconds, but the reverse takes two rounds.

Xill prefer to attack by appearing suddenly from the Ethereal
Plane near the intended prey; this tactic gives opponents a —6
on their surprise rolls.

In melee combat, xill prefer to capture opponents alive; nor-
mally, they use two of their four claws to rake and grapple foes.
Hits from these claws inflict normal damage, but if both hit in
the same round the xill automatically gains a wrestling hold.
The xill uses its remaining two claws to make non-lethal punch-
ing attacks (see the combat section of the PHB or DMG for de-
tails on punching and wrestling). Once the xill has successfully
grappled an opponent, it injects a paralyzing poison into its vic-
tim at the end of the next melee round, giving the victim one
round to break free before the venom is injected. A normal save
vs. poison applies, but if it fails this victim is immediately para-
lyzed for 1d4 hours. The glands that secrete this venom do not
produce a lot of fluid—only enough for two bites every six
hours—and the xill cannot use it on opponents it has not grap-
pled.

Once a victim has been grappled and rendered unconscious,
or grappled and paralyzed, the xill attempts to escape from the
Prime Material Plane to the Ethereal Plane to inject its eggs.
This process takes two rounds, and during this transitional peri-
od when the xill and its prey are becoming ethereal, the xill is
immobile, and loses all its magic resistance. As it turns ethereal,
the creature begins to fade, and during the first round gains —1
to its AC, and in the second —3. Once the creature has returned
to the Ethereal Plane, its magic resistance is restored to 70%,

 

 

 

 

 

and it can only be attacked ethereally.

Since xill are extraplanar creatures, a protection from evil
spell will keep them at bay.

Xill which are frustrated in their attempts to grapple and sub-
due victims usually attack to kill, raking with all four claws.

Habitat/Society: Xill are natives of the Ethereal Plane, and have
lairs there. They are asexual creatures which live in small bands
for their own protection, and for the protection of their young.
If attacked on the Ethereal Plane, the xill’s first reaction will be
to flee, and see to the safety of their young and any prisoners
that are serving as egg hatchers.

Xill communicate with each other and with outsiders tele-
pathically.

Xill come to the Prime Material Plane to hunt for human
hosts in which to lay their eggs. In order to find humans, they
tend to seek sources of magic in the borderline ethereal. This
would explain why xill do not seem to attack ordinary citizens,
but rather prefer magic-bearing adventurers. Since adventurers
are often also hardier, xill prefer them to complete their hatch-
ing cycle.

Xill have a life-span of 50 years, reproducing twice during
that life-span. Their eggs hatch in the stomachs of humans,
which provide food for xill young. This process takes approxi-
mately four days, during which a cure disease spell will remove
the infestation. For the next seven days, the larvae inflict
1d10+10 points of internal damage as they attempt to leave the
host's system. During these seven days, the larvae can only be
removed from the host body by a wish or limited wish spell.
After this time, 2d8 young xill emerge from the host, killing it
instantly. These young grow almost immediately (1-4 hours) in-
to full-size xill.

Ecology: Xill have no effect on human society outside of their
disgusting breeding habits.

©1992 TSA, Inc. All Rights Reserved
 

Xvart

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate or Arctic/Land
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Tribal
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: K
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic Evil
NO. APPEARING: 40-400
ARMOR CLASS: 7
MOVEMENT: 6

HIT DICE: 1-1

THACO: 20

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-5 or by weapon type
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil

SPECIAL DEFENSES: _ Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: | Nil

SIZE: S (3' tall)
MORALE: Average (8-10)
XP VALUE: 15

Leaders 35

Xvarts are a cruel, cowardly race of humanoids which live in
hilly, cavernous regions. They occupy a place in humanoid soci-
ety somewhere between goblins and kobolds. The small, bald,
blue-skinned creatures often act as intermediaries between these
two races, usually dominating the latter.

Although weak individually, they are extremely prolific, and
are almost always encountered in large groups.

Combat: Xvarts will attack a party of humans only if they have
a tremendous numerical advantage. Xvarts fear humans, but
hate halflings, and will attack them even if the xvarts do not
have a tremendous edge in numbers. Xvarts will also attempt to
bully kobolds whenever possible.

Xvarts will almost always try to ambush and overwhelm their
opponents, preferring not to fight fairly at any time. Xvarts like
to fight sleeping or resting opponents, circling them and brutally
attacking before their prey knows what has hit them.

In every group of 20 xvarts, there will be at least one with a
net, which it will attempt to throw at a target to entangle and
impede an enemy. Xvarts will attempt to overbear a foe, knock-
ing him/her down so that all the remaining xvarts can attack.

Xvarts typically use small short swords which cause 2-5 hit
points of damage. Usually there are so many xvarts in a fight
that it is impossible for a fighter to use a shield effectively
against all of them.

For every group of 100 xvarts, there will be a leader, which
has 11 hit points and attacks as a 2HD monster. This leader will
often use a spear or long sword, doing appropriate damage.

While most xvarts are fighters, 5% of them are shamans with
clerical spell use of 2nd level, and another 5% will be magic-
users who cast spells of up to 2nd level. These individuals will
not rush forward in battle, preferring instead to expend their
spells and then escape, Typically, these spell-using xvarts will be
accompanied by 1-6 giant rats.

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Xvart society is crude by human standards, but
effective in keeping the small creatures alive. Xvarts will lair in a
complex of caves or in the deep forest. Xvarts are mostly resist-
ant to the elements, wearing simple cloth doublets. They prefer
blues and greens to dress in, and except for their orange eyes,
they blend into their surroundings well.

Xvarts live a communal existence, with hunting parties going
out daily to try to gather food for the tribe. Xvarts will kill live-
stock or small animals, or raid farms for crops. Xvarts are not
fussy eaters, and will adapt to almost any diet.

Xvart females do not fight, but raise the xvart children and
keep the xvart community as organized as possible. They also
maintain the many traps that have been placed around the
camp.

For every 100 members of a tribe, in addition to the afore-
mentioned leader and spell-casting types, there will be 3 lieuten-
ants, with 8 hit points each (fighting as 1+1 HD monsters). In
every Xvart lair 3-30 giant rats are used as guards.

Xvarts speak their own language, as well as that of goblins
and kobolds. It is for this reason that xvarts are often used as
intermediaries between these often-warring races. Goblins will
use xvarts as spies, while xvarts take a haughtier attitude with
kobolds, It is only the large numbers of kobolds which keep
xvart society from overrunning the slightly weaker kobolds.

Xvarts love to take human prisoners, sometimes for ransom,
sometimes to torment them.

Ecology: Xvarts live for only 50 years, and it is a tough existence
for them. Most creatures are larger and more powerful than
they are. Xvarts mate twice a year, in the spring and in the fall.
Each mating produces two children, which are cared for com-
munally until age seven when they are old enough to assume
their tribal duties of hunting and caring for the camp.
Zygraat

MC14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Forest
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Semi- (4)
TREASURE; Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO, APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 3
MOVEMENT: 24 (C), Wb 12
HIT DICE: 1

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1D4 + Special
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Poison or discharge web
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: 5 (4’)
MORALE: Average (10)
XP VALUE: 270

More commonly known as spider hawks, zygraats are an unu-
sual cross between a bird and a spider. Unlike true birds, this
creature is able to entrap its prey through its webs and poison-
ous bite.

Zygraats are readily identifiable by anyone who has ever
heard of them, for they resemble six-legged birds of prey with a
spiderlike underbelly and abdomen. If the creature's mouth is
examined closely, a series of tiny, hollow fangs will be observed
running along both ridges of its jaw. The abdomen of the mon-
ster is grey in color and, if cut open, will be found to contain a
milky fluid that coalesces into a mass of silky threads upon ex-
posure to air.

Combat: The more passive attack form of the zygraat is to
weave a large web some ten feet square within a tree or between
two opposing vertical surfaces. It then flies up to a vantage
point to wait. While the web is not sticky, it is made up of sev-
eral different layers of fine silk, each laid against the other, cre-
ating a netlike barrier. This webbing has an incredible strength
but is only lightly secured, Prey wandering into this web thus
pulls it free from its anchoring points and becomes trapped dur-
ing that round. Immediately, the zygraat will swoop down from
its vantage point and attack with a bite that delivers 1-4 points
of damage, forcing its victim to make a save vs. poison or suffer
3D6 points of additional damage. The entangled prey is then
permitted a saving throw against paralysis each round to work
itself free of the net.

The zygraat's other means of attack is to project a stream of
netting from its abdomen at a man-sized or smaller target within
50’. The monster often resorts to this attack when hunting away
from its lair. This attack is usable three times in any 24-hour
period, and the victim is allowed a save vs. wands to dodge
aside only if he/she is not surprised. Failure to make the save, or
being caught by surprise, means that the victim is trapped as

 

 

above. This particular attack is possible only if the zygraat is
perched upon a tree or other roosting spot, and cannot be em-
ployed while it is in flight.

Habitat/Society: Adult males of this species are somewhat rare,
for in the process of mating, they are killed and devoured by the
female, which soon thereafter lays 6D6 egg sacks in a weblike
nest that she builds atop high trees or in rocky cliffsides. Baby
zygraats lack the ability to fly or form webs, but can scurry
upon their legs, climbing up and down trees, rock, or web with
ease. Their bite inflicts 1 point of damage, plus an additional 1-4
points of poison damage if a saving throw is failed.

Zygraats are not interested in treasure or gems. They will ig-
nore anything shiny, but will utilize shreds of clothing or other
material for their nest-building. They will occasionally secure
brightly-colored bits of cloth to trees or rocks near their webs to
attract curious creatures to their doom.

Nesting zygraats with young will often have a larder of fresh
meat nearby to feed their ravenous youngsters.

Ecology: For the most part, zygraats do not pose a great threat
as they are found only in isolated forest areas. The monsters
also prefer relatively small prey, and thus they will tend to avoid
most adventurers unless their nests are threatened.

The fluid within the creature’s abdomen is prized, for if used
in casting a web spell, all those caught inside the web's area of
effect must save at —3 when trying to escape. Each full abdo-
men provides a wizard with sufficient material for three such
uses,

The zygraat's webs can also be fashioned into a robe that af-
fords excellent protection against attack, granting an armor
class bonus of three points. Each full web can be made into a
single man-sized garment.

©1992 TSA, Inc. All Rights Reserved

 

—,,
 
n
3
a
13.
Ss
=
0
=

 
MC14-2129

 
 
k to your weapons! Here comes a

‘Bprde of the strangest creatures ever
Sea ae coke. eho
| Sey

FIEND FOLIO® tome are back, updated

and expanded for the AD&D 2nd

edition game. Treat yourself to an

RB reek lore) al miy e mal) mel orp

4 vicious, stilt-legged birds that roam the
ae planes—and they also hunt closer to civilization. Find out
what xvarts do for fun, but don’t expect them to play fair! The
Dea mae Mga ce oo) eer bale OME Co uyd aR -f0) 1b Cp
and other old favorites. Several brand new creatures, such as the
beautiful but haughty gem dragons join them. Don’t pass up your
reas] 1 ee) saath ice) mates ao ECON Cg eM a Cone

Lh — ede
POB 756 Bi. 1 120 Church End, Cherry Hinton
Pee a *‘ = Cambridge C31 3LB
Wi53147 USA — oa

eh a a ek '
ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS. ADB.D. REND FOLIO and the RIGA logo are registered |
ee ee i ah | j
ee ee ee Bee | |

$10.95 U.S.
$13.50 CAN
RE Ae

 
