 

Monstrous
Compendium

VOLUME THREE

FORGOTTEN REALMS’
Appendix

   
  
 

mn :
PT See ALG hei

   
 

Te Pet

  

Monstrous
Compen

VOLUME THREE

Design Concept: David “Zeb” Cook, Steve Winter, Jon Pickens
Designers: William Connors, David Martin, Rick Swan, Gary Thomas
Editor: Mike Breault

Typesetting: Angelika Lokotz

Keylining: Steve Beck

Artistic Coordinator: Peggy Cooper

Cover Art: Jeff Easley

Interior Art: Thomas Baxa and Mark Nelson

 

Distributed to the book trade by Random House, Inc., and in Canada by Random House Ltd. Distributed to the toy and hobby trade
by regional distributors. Distributed in the United Kingdom by TSR Ltd.

This work is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America. Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the material
or artwork presented herein is prohibited without the express written consent of TSR, Inc.

T™
» Inc. TSR Led.
3756 120 Church End, Cherry Hinton
e Geneva, Cambridge CB! 3LB

PRODUCTS OF YOUR IMAGINATION™

©1989 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved, Printed in U.S.A.
ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AD&D, PRODUCTS OF YOUR IMAGINATION, and the TSR logo are trademarks owned by TSR, Inc.

ISBN 0-88038-769-6
PREHISTORIC AND PLEISTOCENE ENCOUNTERS

 

 

 

 

 

Prehistoric Prehistoric Prehistoric Prehistoric
Plain or Scrub Forest Hill or Rough Marsh
2 Tyrannosaurus Rex 2 Snake, giant con. 2 Tyrannosaurus Rex 2 Tanystropheus
3 Tyrannosaurus Rex 3 Snake, giant con. 3 Tyrannosaurus Rex 3 Tanystropheus
4 Dilophosaurus 4 Lizard, giant 4 Allosaurus 4 Snake, giant, con.
5 Ankylosaurus 5 Brontosaurus 5 Gorgosaurus 5 Dimetrodon
6 Gorgosaurus or deinochus 6 Megalosaurus 6 Compsognathus 6 Euparkeria
7 Struthiomimus 7 Allosaurus 7 Dimetrodon 7 Nothosaurus
8 Stegosaurus 8 Ankiasaurus 8 Euparkeria 8 Crocodile, giant
9 Pentaceratops or triceratops 9 Trachodon 9 Ankiasaurus 9 Trachodon or kentrosaurus
10 Trachodon 10 Plateosaurus 10 Iguanadon 10 Iguanodon or lambeosaurus
11 Iguanadon or lambeosaurus 11 Stegosaurus or dacentrurus 11 Pentaceratops or 11 Camarasaurus or cetiosaurus
12 Camarasaurus or 12 Iguanodon or lambeosaurus styracosaurus 12 Brontosaurus or
plateosaurus 13 Euparkeria 12 Pteradactyl brachiosaurus
13 Pteranodon or pterosaur 14 Compsognathus 13 Pteranodon or pterosaur 13 Diplodocus or
14 Podokesaurus 15 Ceratosaurus 14 Triceratops mamenchisaurus
15 Styracosaurus 16 Paleocinthus 15 Stegosaurus 14 Pteradacty!
16 Monoclonius 17 Teratosaurus 16 Lizard, minotaur 15 Pteranodon or pterosaur
17 Ornitholestes 18 Massopondylus 17 Ankylosaurus 16 Massopondylus
18 Ceratosaurus 19 DM Special 18 Paleocinthus 17 Lizard, giant
19 DM Special 20 DM Special 19 DM Special 18 Lizard, Minotaur
20 DM Special 20 DM Special 19 DM Special
20 DM Special
Prehistoric Prehistoric Prehistoric Pleistocene
Fresh Water Deep Water or Ocean Shallow or Coastal Waters Marsh
2 Snake, giant con. 2 Archelon ischyras 2 Lamprey, land 2 Snake, giant con.
3 Snake, giant con. 3 Archelon ischyras 3 Strangleweed 3 Snake, giant con.
4 Pleisiosaurus 4 Eel, marine 4 Elasmosaurus 4 Phororhacos
5 Pleisiosaurus 5 Tennodontosaurus 5 Lamprey 5 Phororhacos
6 Elasmosaurus 6 Dinicthys 6 Shark, common 6 Axebeak
7 Tanystropheus 7 Elasmosaurus 7 Archelon ischyras 7 Axebeak
8 Nothosaurus 8 Shark, common 8 Pleisiosaurus 8 Crocodile, giant
9 Piranha, giant 9 Pleisiosaurus 9 Crab, giant 9 Crocodile, giant
10 Fish, school 10 Pleisiosaurus 10 Fish, school 10 Animal, herd
11 Fish, school 11 Fish, school 11 Fish, school 11 Animal, herd
12 Fish, school 12 Fish, school 12 Fish, school 12 Animal, herd
13 Pteradacty! 13. Whale, common 13 Pteradactyl 13 Animal, herd
14 Pteranodon or pterosaur 14 Shark, common 14 Pteranadon or pterosaur 14 Megatherium
15 Crocodile, giant 15 Shark, giant 15 Barracuda 15 Mastodon
16 Eel, weed 16 Whale, giant 16 Snake, sea 16 Mammal, small
17. Gar, giant 17 Squid, giant 17 Octopus 17 Lizard, giant
18 Crayfish, giant 18 Ray, manta 18 Ray, sting 18 Cavemen
19 DM Special 19 DM Special 19 DM Special 19 DM Special
20 DM Special 20 DM Special 20 DM Special 20 DM Special
Pleistocene Pleistocene Pleistocene Pleistocene
Plain or Scrub Forest Rough or Hill Mountain
2 Horse, wild 2 Snake, giant con. 2 Tiger, S.T. 2 Ape, carnivorous
3 Horse, wild 3. Snake, large con. 3. Ape, carnivorous 3 Ape, carnivorous
4 Lion, spotted 4 Wolf, dire 4 Ape, carnivorous 4 Wolf, dire
5 Weasel, giant 5 Lion, spotted 5 Wolf, dire 5 Wolf, dire
6 Boar, giant 6 Weasel, giant 6 Wolf, dire 6 Lion, spotted
7 Axebeak 7 Ape, carnivorous 7 Bear, cave 7 Lion, spotted
8 Hyenodon 8 Tiger, S.T. 8 Hyenodon 8 Bear, cave
9 Tiger, S.T. 9 Baboon 9 Lion, spotted 9 Bear, cave
10 Animal, herd 10 Animal, herd 10 Animal, herd 10 Animal, herd
11 Animal, herd 11 Animal, herd 11 Animal, herd 11 Animal, herd
12 Animal, herd 12 Animal, herd 12 Animal, herd 12 Animal, herd
13, Mammoth or mastodon 13. Megatherium 13. Animal, herd 13. Animal, herd
14 Titanothere 14 Mammal, small 14. Vulture. common 14 Vulture, common or giant
15 Baluchitherium 15 Mammoth or mastodon 15 Rhino, wooley 15 Caveman
16 Rhino, wooley 16 Boar, giant 16 Mammal, small 16 Caveman
17 Camel 17 Baluchitherium 17 Cavemen 17 Caveman
18 Caveman 18 Caveman 18 Cavemen 18 Condor
19 DM Special 19 DM Special 19 DM Special 19 DM Special
20 DM Special 20 DM Special 20 DM Special 20 DM Special
Notes:

Monsters in italic type are typically airborne when encountered.

Pleistocene Marsh: Herd animals are 80% likely to be giant flightless
birds of 1-3 Hit Dice. These are non-aggressive unless provoked or
startled.

Waterborne: Fish schools are huge schools of harmless fish. They are
preyed on by aquatic carnivores. Some harmless schools of fish might
be mistaken for piranha (or vice versa).
Ascallion

 

 

 

Adult Female
(Mother)

ORGANIZATION:

School
Any

Nil
Neutral

Adult Male
(Shadow)

Young
(Biter)

School
Any

Solitary
Any
Nil Nil
Neutral

 

NO. APPEARING:

NO. OF ATTACKS:

SPECIAL DEFENSES:
MAGIC RESISTANCE:

XP VALUE:

Sometimes known as scallions or ‘scallions, ascallions are fear-
some predators that inhabit the world’s oceans. Those coastal and
aquatic communities that find themselves contending with ascal-
lions quickly learn to respect their powerful bite and lightning,
speed. The most unusual feature of ascallions is the manner in
which the female and her young hunt.

Adult female ascallions are much larger than their male coun-
terparts, averaging 18 feet in length. The female ascallion is dark
grey along her dorsal surface and shades to light grey on her un-
derside. Like the males, they are similar in appearance to sharks.

Ascallion young are small and fairly harmless looking, averag-
ing just over one foot in length. As a rule, they are light grey in
color with occasional individuals being a dark grey or black.
They normally dwell inside the gaping maw of their mother and
are seen only when she releases them to attack her prey.

Combat: Female ascallions usually attack their prey in conjunc-
tion with their young. When a victim is spotted, the female re-
mains at a safe distance and opens its jaws wide. Instantly, 2d6
young dart forth from within the mouth and tear at the prey with
their razor-sharp teeth. After they have eaten their fill, the
mother moves forward and consumes what remains. In the event
that the young are unable to contend with the chosen victim, the
mother can rush forward and come to their aid.

The female ascallion’s powerful jaws have been known to splin-
ter the hulls of small boats and make short work of most oppo-
nents. When employed to attack a ship or similar construct, the
jaws of the female ascallion deliver 2d4 points of hull damage.

All types of ascallions have an unusual nervous system that is
far less centralized than that of most other creatures. The result of
this unique physiology is that, while the creature has virtually no
sense of touch or pain, it is utterly immune to all forms of mental
attack or paralysis (including both mental and chemical attacks.)

Habitat/Society: Ascallions are nomadic creatures that roam
throughout the world’s temperate and tropical seas. Although

 

they cannot live in fresh water, the females have been known to
venture up wide rivers in search of prey for brief periods of time.

Ascallions spawn only rarely, with each mother giving birth to
2d6 young. These young are protected by the mother, living
safely inside her mouth and coming out only to hunt and feed, for
roughly three years. When the young reach maturity, they turn
on their mother and eat their way out of her body, killing her in
the process. Mature young are treated as adults of the species, but
have half the hit points that they will acquire when they are full
grown,

Once the young ascallions have slain their mother, they dis-
band and leave the company of their siblings forever. If the
mother is slain before they reach maturity, they will generally re-
main together until they are old enough to strike out on their
own.

Because of the singular nature of their nervous system, ascal-
lions are unable to hunt by sensing vibrations in the water as
many ocean predators do. Instead, they are forced to seek out
their prey by sight and smell alone.

Ecology: The ascallion regards all other forms of aquatic life as
potential prey. Even sharks, which often stay near other preda-
tors to share in their kills, do not remain in an area occupied by an
ascallion.

Ascallions are deadly enemies of octopi and attack them on
sight, abandoning whatever else they may be doing at the time.

Shadow

Male ascallions, commonly called shadows, range in color
from black to charcoal grey. They greatly resemble sharks and
average around eight feet in length at adulthood.

Adult male ascallions attack with their powerful jaws and
sharp teeth. Although their bite is not nearly as powerful as that
of female ascallions, the males can hold their own against crea-
tures as deadly as the giant shark.
Asperii

 

 

CLIMATETERRAIN: Mountain peaks
FREQUENCY: Rare
Herd

ORGANIZATION:

   
   

   

Exceptional (15-16)

 

TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral good
NO. APPEARING: 14
ARMOR CLASS: 4

21, Fl 42 (C)

   
 
    
 
   

 

OF.
DAMAGE/ATTACK:
SPECIAL ATTACKS:
SPECIAL DEFENSES:

XP VALUE:

Commonly known as wind steeds, the asperii is highly prized as a
mount and can be very loyal to its rider.

Asperii are white, grey, or dun in color and have small manes
that are usually silver, white. or light grey.

Combat: Although asperii are gentle beings, they are also quite
capable of defending themselves if forced into combat. Each
round, asperii can kick with their front hooves and bite with their
sharp teeth. Asa rule, they direct their bites at the wings and faces
of their opponents.

Asperii are utterly immune to damage from any form of cold-
based attack. Similarly, they are unharmed by winds of any type
(including the whirlwind attacks of an air elemental or a djinni
and so forth). This ability also enables them to slip free of the
grasp of an aerial servant with unusual ease (they have a 40%
chance to do so.)

Conversely, they are unusually vulnerable to flames (though
not to heat) and suffer double the normal amount of damage from
any attack that employs flames.

Asperii have keen eyes that not only give them the power of
true sight but can also see into both the Ethereal and Astral
planes. This being the case, they are often able to warn their
riders of the approach of creatures that might otherwise be unde-
tected. The unusual nature of asperii makes them immune to all
forms of gaze attacks, such as those of the basilisk or catoblepas.

When flying, the typical asperii is fairly agile (having a maneu-
verability class of C). They retain such quick response times until
they are burdened with more than 150 pounds. An asperii can
carry as much as 600 pounds but its maneuverability class is re-
duced by one for each 150 pounds carried.

A loyal asperii (that is, one who has accepted an individual as it
master) flies so smoothly that its rider may even cast spells from its
back. Obviously, any normal restrictions to the use of a particular
spell still apply. If an asperii elects to strike with its hooves or bite in
combat, this prevents the rider from engaging in spellcasting.

Habitat/Society: Asperii sometimes live in herds of as many as
20 animals but are most often encountered in groups of two or
three. Asa rule, they live in the uppermost regions of virtually in-
accessible mountain peaks.

Asperii communicate with each other by means of a limited

 

 

 

 

 

form of telepathy, which has a range of 60 yards. With this
power, they can also speak with other intelligent beings.

Asperii are the mortal enemies of hippogriffs and griffons,
tending to attack these creatures on sight. They have also been
known to do battle with rocs, although they normally ignore
such creatures if possible. Pegasi and asperii get along quite well,
and the two species are often found in each other's company.

If taken when young, an asperii can be trained to accept a single
master. If this is done, it becomes utterly loyal to this individual
and will not bear another upon its back unless so instructed by its
master. An asperii will refuse to accept a master who is not of neu-
tral, lawful neutral, or neutral good alignment. Young asperii,
commonly known as “doffs,” can be sold to those who wish to
train them for between 4,000 and 6,000 gold pieces.

The wingless asperii are capable of flight due to their natural
powers of levitation. In addition, they are able to ride winds of ei-
ther magical or mundane nature. When they do so, they add 1 to
their movement rate for each mile per hour over 20 of wind. Aspe-
rij also have an inherent ability to cast a feather fall spell up to four
times per day on themselves or on any being they are able to touch.

Ecology: Although asperii are omnivorous and eat a great vari-
ety of plants and animals, they do have a few favorite foods. As-
perii prize mint leaves, mistletoe, fish, and hawk flesh. In fact,
they so delight in eating fish that they have been known to raid
fishing boats and coastal villages in search of them. Perhaps be-
cause asperii can go for long periods of time without eating, they
seem to have unlimited appetites when given the chance to feed
on their favorite foods.

Noble Asperii

The noble asperii are a very rare off-shoot of this species. Many
people describe the hide of a noble as looking like an iridescent,
polished abalone shell.

Their telepathy is more powerful than that of their more com-
mon counterparts, having a 90-foot range and being forceful
enough to permit the noble to implant a suggestion on creatures
of 3 or fewer Hit Dice.

Nobles have 6 Hit Dice (THACO 15) and are often found at the
head of large herds of asperii.
Beholder-kin

 

 

Spectator

Gauth (Nighteyes)
‘Subterranean

   

         

   
 

 

O ION: litary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Omnivore Carnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Very to highly Exceptional
a Sasa eS) (15=

 
   

aa

Caaitsutalsminelole Neatallevil

 

  

    
 

 

NO. APPEARING: 1-2 1
ARMOR CLASS: Body 4, eyes7 —0/2/7
MOVEMENT: F110 (B) F19 (B)
HIT DICE: 444 6+6 to
fee Ait points 949
THACO: Pas oK7 13 (6+6 HD)
11 (9+9 HD)
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 3-12
SPECIAL ATTACKS: | See below
E See below
2 : Nil
SIZE: S$ (4' diameter) _L (4'-6" diameter)
MORALE: Elite (14) Champion (15-16)
to Fanatic (17-18)
XP VALUE: 4,000 6,000 (6 +6 HD)
9,000 (9 +9 HD)
Spectator

Another relative of the beholder, the spectator is a guardian of
places and treasures. Once it is given a task, it guards for up to
101 years and lets no one use, borrow, or examine an item or trea-
sure.

The spectator has a large central eye and four smaller eye stalks
protruding from the top of its hovering, spherical body.

Combat: The spectator is difficult to surprise, as it has a sur-
prise modifier of +2. Since the spectator is basically a passive
creature, it attempts to communicate and implant its suggestion
as its first act, unless it is immediately attacked. In close combat,
the spectator can bite for 1d4 +1 points of damage.

The creature's body is covered in tough hide and thus is AC 4.
Any blow is 70% likely to hit the body, which contains all of the
beast's hit points.

Hits on the eye stalks (AC 7) occur 20% of the time, while hits
on the central eye (also AC 7) happen only 10% of the time. Any
hit on an eye or eye stalk destroys it; a spectator blinded in every
eye cannot defend its treasure and teleports to the outer plane of
Nirvana. This is the only condition under which it leaves its post.
Its eyes regenerate in one day and then it returns. If the treasure is
gone, the creature again leaves for Nirvana, never to return.

The spectator has a general magic resistance of 5%. But when
the central eye is undamaged, it can reflect one spell cast at it per
round back against the caster. This does not apply to touch spells.
The reflection occurs only if the spectator rolls a successful saving
throw vs. spell.

Reflection is possible only if the caster is standing within a 60°
arc of the front of the central eye.

For example, if a mage casts a lightning bolt spell at a spectator,
the DM rolls the spectator’s saving throw to see if the spell is re-
flected. If the roll fails, then the spectator’s magic resistance is
rolled. Only if this roll fails as well does the lightning bolt cause
any damage (and even then the spectator gets a saving throw for
half damage).

 

 

 

 

 

The spellcaster is allowed a normal saving throw vs. his re-
flected spell and only he risks any damage. Thus, in the earlier ex-
ample, if the lightning bolt were reflected, only the mage could be
hit by it. If the mage’s saving throw is successful, he receives no
damage (though a failed saving throw means he suffers the full
damage rolled).

The spectator has an initiative modifier of +1. All three “at-
tack eyes” can be brought to bear on the same target. The small
eyes have the following powers:

#1: Create food and water. Creating up to the amount of food
and water for a large meal (up to six people) takes one full round.

#2: Cause serious wounds, Inflicts 2d8 +3 points of damage to
a single being at a range of 60 yards. A saving throw vs. spell is al-
lowed for half damage. This attack has a casting time of 1

#3: Paralyzation ray. Range of 90 feet, one target only, dura-
tion 5d4 rounds. This attack has a casting time of 1. The spectator
never attacks a paralyzed character; the character may even be
allowed to go his own way if he leaves in peace.

#4: Telepathy. Range 120 feet, only one target. Communica-
tion is possible in this way. The beast can also plant a suggestion if
the target fails a saving throw vs. spell. The suggestion is always
to leave in peace, and it has a casting time of 1. Communication
takes twice as long.

Habitat/Society: If properly met, the spectator can be quite
friendly. It will tell a party exactly what it is guarding early in any
conversation so that there is no argument. If its charge is not
threatened, it can be very amiable and talkative via its telepathy.

Spectators move by a very rapid levitation in any direction.
They will drift aimlessly when asleep (20% likely when encoun-
tered), never touching the ground.

Under rare circumstances, a powerful mage might have sum-
moned two spectators to guard a particularly valuable treasure.
In this case, there is no chance of surprising the creatures, as they
sleep in shifts.

On the plane of Nirvana, spectators live in large groups of up
to 1,000 individuals, using their eyes to create vast feasts. Outsid-
ers are usually not welcome at these spectator feasts, but at times
spectators are known to share their company with guests.
Beholder-kin

Ecology: The treasure being guarded is 90% likely to be a magi-
cal item with a value of at least 15,000 gp. If the spectator gains
incidental treasure while performing its duty, this is not part of its
charge and it freely allows this to be taken. Incidental treasure
can be generated as follows: 40% for 3-300 coins of mixed types,
30% for 1d6 gems of 50-gp base value, 20% for 1d4 potions, 15%
fora +1 piece of armor, 15% fora +1 weapon, and 5% for a mis-
cellaneous magical item valued at 1,000 XP or less.

Spectators are summoned from Nirvana by casting monster
summoning V with the material component of three or more
small eyes from a beholder. (The chance of success is 10% per
eye.) The spectator can be commanded only to guard some trea-
sure. It performs no other duty, and if commanded to undertake
some other task, it returns to Nirvana immediately. If its guarded
treasure is ever destroyed or stolen, the spectator is released from
service and returns to Nirvana. The summoner may take the item
with no interference from the spectator, but this releases the crea-
ture to go back to Nirvana.

Gauth

The gauth is believed to be a distant relative of the beholder, al-
though this has never been proven. While it is quite similar to that
creature, its ability to feed on the energy of magical objects makes
it even more dangerous in some ways.

The spherical body of a gauth is normally five feet in diameter
and generally brown in color, mottled with purple and grey. A
thick layer of hard flesh provides the creature's body with an AC
of 0. Located in the center of the gauth’s forward hemisphere is its
large central eye, which is AC 7.

The central eye is surrounded by a ring of smaller eyes that are
protected by ridges of tough flesh (giving them the same Armor
Class as the body). These eyes provide the creature with normal
vision in lighted areas and infravision out to 90 feet in darkened
places.

On the underside is the beast’s fearsome mouth with its accom-
panying cluster of four feeding tendrils, while the top is adorned
with a crown of six eye stalks, Both the eye stalks and the feeding
tendrils are AC 2.

Combat: When a gauth moves into combat, it begins to glow,
much as if it were the target of a faerie fire spell, to attract the at-
tention of its foes. Any creature distracted by this runs the risk of
being caught in the beam of the gauth’s central eye. A creature
that meets the gaze of this great eye must roll a successful saving
throw vs. spell, with a —2 penalty, or be affected as if the victim
of a feeblemind spell.

If a gauth chooses to bite with its great maw, its sharp fangs in-
flict 3d4 points of damage. The four tendrils around the mouth
can grab and hold victims as if they had a Strength of 18, but they
can inflict no damage themselves.

These creatures have an unusual physiology that enables them
to regenerate 1 hit point every two turns.

A gauth in combat can also employ its six eye stalks. Although
these are fully retractable when not in use, they are usually all ex-
tended prior to the start of any conflict. Theses eyes have the fol-
lowing powers:

Cause serious wounds: This power has a 30-foot range but is
otherwise the same as the 4th-level priest's spell, inflicting 2d8 +1
points of damage.

Repulsion: This power has the same effects as the 6th-level
wizard's spell, with a 10-foot wide path and a 40-foot range.

 

 

Cone of cold: This terrible power is similar to the Sth-level
wizard's spell. It causes 3d4 points of damage and has an area of
effect five feet wide at the base, 50 feet long, and 20 feet wide at
the mouth. It can be used only three times per day.

Lightning bolt: This eye can unleash a straight bolt of light-
ning from the eye outward to an 80-foot range. It inflicts 4d4
points of damage, although a successful saving throw vs. spell
cuts that in half. This power can be used up to four times per day
and is otherwise similar to the 3rd-level wizard's spell.

Paralyzation: This eye can affect a single target up to 40 feet
away from the gauth. If the target fails its saving throw vs. paral-
ysis, then it is unable to move. Only a dispel magic spell can free
the victim from the effects of this eye.

Dweomer drain: Perhaps the most feared of the gauth’s
powers, this ability permits the gauth to drain charges from magi-
cal items. It has a 40-foot range and can be targeted on one indi-
vidual per round. In addition to preventing an object from
functioning for the duration of that round, this power drains one
charge from any charged object. Permanent objects, such as mag-
ical swords, are rendered powerless for one round by this ability.
Artifacts are not affected by the dweomer drain.

In addition, this eye has no effect on spells that have been mem-
orized (but not yet cast) and does not break the concentration of a
wizard engaged in invoking a spell. It does neutralize any spell
cast by its target that round, however.

A dispel magic spell cast on any of the gauth’s eye stalks pre-
vent its use for 1d4 rounds. The central eye, any fully retracted
eye stalks, the body's ability to glow, and the gauth’s natural levi-
tation are not subject to harm by such a spell.

If a gauth is slain, its magical energy is dissipated. Usually, this
is a harmless event, but there is a 2% chance that it is cata-
strophic, inflicting 4d4 points of damage to all creatures within
ten feet. No saving throw is possible against this damage.

Gauth are immune to their own powers and to those of other
gauth.

Society/Habitat: Gauth prefer to dwell in dark caves and ca-
verns, coming out only to feed on livestock. They are cunning
enough to avoid taking from the same herd and try to avoid insti-
gating any organized attempts to kill them.

Although gauth are not known to fight over territories or prey,
they do go to great lengths to avoid each other. Even when they
encounter another of their kind in the wilderness, they often ig-
nore them utterly.

Ecology: A gauth can survive by eating livestock and such, but
it greatly prefers to devour magical objects. In some unknown
manner, the creature is able to absorb magical energy and feed on
it. Each turn that an object spends in the gauth’s stomach causes it
to lose one charge. A permanent object is rendered inoperative af-
ter one day (but artifacts are not affected). Magical objects that
cannot be wholly digested by a gauth are spat out after they have
been drained of all their power.

Gauth are thought to live a century or so and then die of some-
thing akin to old age. Within a week of their death, however, two
young gauth emerge from the corpse after devouring much of it.
Although smaller than their parent (each has 2+2 or 3+3 HD
anda bite that causes only 2d4 points of damage) they have all the
powers of a full-grown adult.

Various portions of a gauth’s body (the eyes, primarily) are
much sought after by mages who wish to understand the biology
of these mysterious creatures.
Belabra (Tangler)

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN:

‘Temperate forests
Rare
Solitary

       
 

TREASURE: Nil

 

ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1
ARMOR CLASS: —2 (head)

6 (tentacles)

 
      

NO. OF ATTACKS:

lentangle
orl ram
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-8 (ram only)

   
 

SIZE: M (5' long)
MORALE: Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: 975

The belabra, also called “tangler,” is a most unusual creature,
highly sought after because it can sometimes be domesticated.

The typical belabra has a large, hemispherical shell that mea-
sures some two feet in diameter and is generally black or dark
grey in color. Extending from the underside of the shell are the
creature's 12 rubbery tentacles, its deadly grey beak, and its pale
white belly. The monster's four eyes extend above its shell on
short eye stalks.

Combat: When in close combat, a belabra bounds about so that
it can shield its soft underside with its hard shell. When given an
opening, the belabra attacks either by bounding at its targets and
ramming them with its shell or by entangling them in its barbed
tentacles and tearing at them with its beak.

When employing the former method, the belabra kicks with its
tentacles to hurl itself into the air. When gliding in this manner,
the creature can travel up to 60 yards. If leaping into a breeze or
confronted by a strong crosswind, this distance is cut by ten
yards, In a strong headwind, the distance traveled is cut by 20
yards. The ramming inflicts 2d4 points of damage to the target.

At any point during its leap, the belabra can whip its tentacles
around a target and attempt to entangle it. This requires the
creature to roll a successful attack roll with a +4 bonus. An en-
tangled foe loses all of its normal Dexterity bonuses to Armor
Class, and the belabra gains a +4 bonus to attack rolls made
with its beak. Once per turn a victim may try to escape from the
tentacles by rolling against his bend bars/lift gates score.
Whether or not the roll is successful, the victim suffers 1d4 +2
points of damage from the barbs that cover the tentacles. The
grip of the tentacles causes no damage unless the ensnared crea-
ture attempts to break free.

The belabra’s hard shell gives its head an Armor Class of ~2.
Asa rule, the rest of the creature (including its tentacles) is drawn
up into the shell when not in use. Thus, the tentacles and under-
belly (which are Armor Class 6) can be attacked only when a vic-
tim has been ensnared.

 

 

 

 

 

Injured tentacles release a spray of the creature's gray-white

blood, which causes all humans, elves, and halflings within ten
feet to roll saving throws vs. poison, with —3 penalties. Those
who fail their rolls are partially blinded and overcome by sneez-
ing fits. They also suffer a —4 penalty to their attack rolls and
their Armor Classes are worsened by 2 for 3d8 rounds.

Habitat/Society: The belabra is a solitary creature that is found
primarily in wooded regions throughout the world’s temperate
regions.

When at rest or waiting for prey, the creature draws itself up in-
side its shell and remains perfectly still. In this position, it is often
mistaken for a large rock by the unwary. The belabra can sense its
prey by both sight and scent.

Biologically, the belabra are most unusual creatures. They
have only one sex, although they are not truly asexual as a lone
creature cannot reproduce. The offspring begin as buds on the in-
ner wall of their parent's stomach. Here they gestate for six to ten
months before being ejected by the parent.

Ecology: If taken at a young age, a belabra can be trained to
obey simple commands and act as a guard or hunter. If so trained,
it identifies with its master and remains with him even in the heat
of battle. Morale rolls are required only if the situation is unusu-
ally dangerous.

Training a captured belabra takes 4d4 weeks and requires a
skilled instructor, a number of live animals (to serve as practice
kills), and the frequent presence of the person who will be the
creature's master. Adverse conditions can greatly extend the
training period.

Once their training is completed, the belabra can be employed
in the same manner as an attack dog. A young belabra that has
been raised for two years can be taught to capture and hold a vic-
tim without trying to kill it.

A captured belabra young is worth some 1,500 gold pieces on
the open market.
Berbalang

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any land or the Astral plane
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary

peer ereae ‘Nights of the full moon

f 2 & Spe sap ar oa
INTELLIGENCE: © i 12)

TREASURE: D

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil

 

NO. APPEARING:
ARMOR CLASS:
MOVEMENT:

  
 
   

 

OF ATTACKS:
DAMAGE/ATTACK:
SPECIAL ATTACKS:
SPECIAL DEFENSES:

 

The berbalang is a dark and evil creature that spends most of its
life in a comatose state while its spirit wanders the Astral plane.
When it does return to our world, it does so only to feed on the
flesh of humans who dwell near its hiding place.

A typical berbalang is a gaunt biped with black, leathery skin.
Its wide, glowing eyes, which provide the berbalang with infra-
vision out to 120 yards, are watery and white in color. Two
broad, bat-like wings sprout from the creature's back and enable
it to fly with great speed and agility.

Combat: When a berbalang or its projection (see below) is en-
countered and forced into combat, it makes the most of its ability
to fly. When it strikes, it rips at opponents with its keen claws and
attempts to bite them with its needle-like teeth.

If a berbalang’s projection is hit, it immediately takes flight and
attempts to flee from the battle. The projection is immune to
charm, sleep, and hold spells.

 

Habitat/Society: The berbalang is a most unusual creature. The
vast majority of its life is spent in a death-like trance that permits
the monster's spirit to wander at will throughout the Astral plane.
Here the berbalang stalks those creatures that are weaker than it-
self and engages in its complex courtship and mating rituals.

If the body is discovered or disturbed in any way, the berbalang
is aware of this and returns to defend itself. Because of the great
distance which the berbalang’s spirit may have to cross to reach
its material form, however, this can take quite a long time (1d100
rounds). If the body is destroyed before the berbalang can defend
itself, the astral spirit is also slain. For this reason, the berbalang
does its best to seclude and protect the resting place of its physical
form.

Once per month, on the three days of the full moon, the berba-
lang returns to the Prime Material plane to feed. At this time, the
creature alters its trance slightly and manifests an exact duplicate
of itself, known as a projection. Once the projection is formed, it
is sent forth in search of the berbalang’s only food—a freshly slain
human being.

The projection, which is controlled directly by the berbalang,
can travel up to three miles from its body. If the projection must
fight, it does so just as the berbalang itself would (see above).

 

 

 

 

 

If the projection is hit or suffers any injury during its quest for
food, it takes flight at once and flees. As quickly as possible, the
berbalang guides its projection back to its resting place. If the pro-
jection is destroyed, there is a 75% chance that the shock to the
berbalang’s system will prove to be fatal for it as well. If the pro-
jection is only injured, but not slain, the berbalang cannot mani-
fest another for a number of days equal to the number of hit
points it lost.

When the projection returns to its master, it is dissipated. Ad-
venturers who have followed the projection to finish it off may
well be shocked to find themselves confronted by a healthy ber-
balang.

If the berbalang is not discovered and destroyed, it will eventu-
ally seek to avenge itself upon those who interfered with its feed-
ing. Although there may be a lull while the body of the berbalang
recovers from the shock of the attack on its projection and is able
to send forth another, retribution is a certainty.

If the projection was forced back to the body or destroyed be-
fore it could find prey to feed upon, the berbalang will send forth
another, as soon as it is able, to satisfy its hunger (regardless of
the phase of the moon) before seeking its revenge.

Ecology: When the projection kills a human, it picks up the
corpse and begins to return with it to its lair. As it does so, the ber-
balang itself awakens from its trance and the projection begins to
feed on the body. By the time the projection has reached the ber-
balang's hiding place, the body has been all but stripped of flesh
and the berbalang’s hunger has been satisfied.

In order to avoid drawing attention to itself, the berbalang usu-
ally moves its lair every three or four months. At this time, it
moves only during the night and avoids any confrontation if it
can. Thus actual contact with the berbalang itself, as opposed to
its projection, is minimal.

There is no record of anyone discovering how the berbalang is
able to derive sustenance when only its projection feeds on the
slain humans it hunts. Likewise, the exact process by which the
berbalang is able to mate and reproduce when its only contact
with others of its species takes place in a spiritual form on the As-
tral plane remains a mystery.
Bhaergala

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate or tropical jungles
and forests
FREQUENCY: Rare

        

INTELLIGENCE:

 

   

  

Average

TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1
ARMOR CLASS: 6
MOVEMENT: 15
HIT DICE ate

ATTACKS: 2 claws and 1 bite
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6/1-6/1-8
SPECIAL ATTACK: Pounce

Poison resistance, spell turning
"MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil
MORALE:

XP VALUE: 650

SPECIAL DEFENSES:

  

  

 

 

 

The bhaergala is a large predator that roams temperate and tropical
jungles or woodlands in search of prey. It is greatly feared by trav-
elers because of its fondness for human, elven, and satyr prey.

A bhaergala looks something like a cross between a wolf and a
lion, although it is clearly not related to either creature.

The fur of a bhaergala gives off a faint but unmistakable odor,
which has been described as smelling like fresh bread or biscuits.

The bhaergala can mimic the speech and songs of men and
elves with great skill. When hunting, it often uses this power to
lure them into an ambush. Most bhaergalas can speak the com-
mon tongue of men.

Combat: A bhaergala usually attacks unsuspecting victims by
pouncing on them from a great height. The superior agility of the
bhaergala enables it to drop from as high as 60 feet without sus-
taining damage. After that, it suffers 1d6 points of damage (up to
a maximum of 20d6) for every ten feet it falls.

When it pounces on a victim, the bhaergala can strike only
with its claws during the first round. If these hit, however, they
inflict their maximum damage.

In normal combat, the creature lashes out with its two front
claws and tears at its foes with its powerful jaws. The bhaergala is
fearsome in combat and often rips great pieces of flesh from an
enemy, which are then dropped for later consumption. The
bhaergala has been known to keep ripping apart a body that has
long since ceased fighting back.

The great constitution of a bhaergala enables it to regenerate 2
points of damage per day and gives it a +3 bonus to all saving
throws vs. poison. Further, the creature has a 99% chance to sur-
vive a severe system shock.

The bhaergala has a limited ability to protect itself from magi-
cal attacks as well. Up to four times per day, the creature can turn
a spell that has been directed against it. In these instances, the
power acts just as would a ring of spell turning. It is important to
note, however, that this is not an innate ability; it requires the
bhaergala to focus its attention and prevents it from taking any
other action that round.

Habitat/Society: The bhaergala is a solitary creature that stalks
its prey from the dense underbrush common to jungles and syl-

 

 

 

 

 

van woodlands. It normally moves in on its prey from downwind
so that its distinctive scent does not give it away before it can
strike.

When a bhaergala is encountered in the wilds, there is a chance
that it will not attack. The bhaergala are known for their great
love of song and music and can often be lulled to sleep by a tal-
ented singer or musician. The chance that a bhaergala can be se-
dated in this manner depends upon its own belief that it is safe
and free from any threat of attack. The base chance to sing a
bhaergala to sleep is 25%. This is increased by 5% if the singer is
alone, by 5% per point of the singer's Charisma over 16, and by
15% if the singer is a professional or talented performer. If the
bhaergala feels threatened, has been recently injured, attacked,
or is hungry and on the hunt, then any attempt at calming it is
doomed to fail.

If lulled to sleep, the bhaergala naps for only 1d10 rounds, as
they never sleep for longer periods of time. When it awakes, it
will likely give chase to the singer if it finds that he has gone.

Ecology: Bhaergala seek out others of their kind only to mate.
When they do find a partner, they mate only in sandy areas (river
banks, sandbars, and so forth), Six months later, the female
bhaergala gives birth to a litter of 2d4 cubs.

The parents remain together for just over a year to raise their
progeny. As soon as the cubs make their first kill, they are turned
out from their parent's den and must go their own way. At this
point, they have all the powers and abilities of adult bhaergalas,
but have only 2 +2 Hit Dice. Further, their attacks cause only half
the usual damage. When the last of the cubs is gone, the parents
also part company, never to meet again.

An adult bhaergala usually sleeps in the boughs of tall trees, re-
turning to its lair only rarely. This well-hidden den is often in a
caves, ruin, or similar place of desolation and serves as a storage
area for whatever items the bhaergala has collected over the
years. As a rule, there is little if any true treasure in the lair of a
bhaergala. It often collects musical instruments and noise-
makers, which are usually broken, from the bodies of its victims.
From time to time, an unusual or even magical instrument has
turned up in the lair of a bhaergala.
Bichir (Lungfish, Giant)

      

FORGOTTEN REALIN
heretical j

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any swamp
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: School

 

   
  

  

GEN(
TREASURE:

 

ALIGNMENT:
NO. APPEARING: 1-4
ARMOR CLASS: 6

   

MORALE: ‘Average (8-10)
XP VALUE: 1,400 (5 HD)
3,000 (7 HD)

The bichir is a giant relative of the more common lungfish that is
found throughout the temperate and tropical swamps of the
world, Although often mistaken for a lizard, the bichir is actually
related to sharks and similar fishes.

Bichirs have long, thick bodies that are a tan, brown, and
cream color to provide them with camouflage in their native envi-
ronment. They have strong jaws set with sharp white teeth and
black, pupil-less eyes. Their heads are broad and flat. Although
covered with small scales, the hide of bichirs feels smooth to the
touch. A ridge of fins runs down their backs to end in a broad,
fan-shaped tail.

Combat: When hunting on land, a bichir moves forward
slowly, much as a snake does, until it reaches a point where it can
strike at its prey. As it moves, it pauses frequently to sniff around
before continuing onward.

When it strikes, the bichir lunges forward to snap with its pow-
erful jaws and sharp teeth. Despite the size of its maw, the bichir
never swallows its prey whole.

If confronted by a creature that it can not overcome or if it is
having difficulty slaying its victim, the bichir can cast an entangle
spell. This spell can be used as many as six times per day and has a
range of 60 yards; it is otherwise identical to the priest's spell of
the same name. The bichir can make use of the entangle spell to
flee from danger or to aid it in defeating a creature more powerful
than itself.

Although the bichir has a natural resistance to magical spells
and their effects, it greatly fears such attacks. When confronted
by creatures that clearly have magical abilities, the bichir will ei-
ther flee or, if that is impossible, attempt to ambush them.

Habitat/Society: Bichir are able to dwell with equal ease in wa-
ter or on land. They have lungs for breathing and swim bladders
much like those of fish. When they move about in the water, they
swim with broad strokes of their wide tail fins. On land, they use
their front fins to move about much as seals do (dragging their

 

 

 

 

 

bodies behind them.) When on land, they must keep their skins
moist and so never stray far from water.

Bichir live in small schools, although only those on a hunt are
normally encountered. When hunting underwater, the bichir uses
its keen eyesight to track its prey. The favorite food of a bichir is
the flesh of lizard men, which they find to be a great delicacy.
Bichir also enjoy a wide variety of frogs, fish, and insects. They
have been known to hunt large animals as well and can devour
creatures as large as a nine-foot-tall humanoid.

Because of the unusual structure of their eyes, they can see
clearly as far as 80 yards when submerged. Of course, unusually
murky or muddy water can greatly reduce the effective range of
their sight. On land, their eyes are far less effective, seeing for
only 20 yards.

Conversely, their sense of smell is more acute on land than in
the water, When hunting out of the water, the bichir can smell
prey as far as 90 yards away. In the water, however, they can only
smell creatures within 20 yards.

When in the water, a bichir can also sense even the most minute
of vibrations. In fact, bichir have been known to move toward a
faint vibration whose source was as far as half a mile away.

Ecology: The bichir breeds whenever its swamps are flooded
(by spring run-off, for example). Males and females have been
known to cross great distances to find each other for mating.

The young, from 1 to 3 in number, are born three to six months
after the mating. These newt-like creatures typically have an Ar-
mor Class of 8, a movement rate of 3 on land (or 12 in the water),
and 2 or 3 Hit Dice. Asa rule, their bite inflicts only 1d4 +1 points
of damage. They can employ their ability to entangle only three
times per day, but they have their parents’ full magic resistance.

Although the bichir cannot talk and have no language of their
own, they have been known to emit an open-mouthed panting
noise that is quite unusual and can be heard for great distances. It
is believed that they use this sound to signal each other or attract
mates.

 
Bunyip

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate fresh water
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Animal (1)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 5
MOVEMENT: Sw 12

HIT DICE: si

THACO: 1s

NO, OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Roar, sever limb
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (6' long)
MORALE: Average (8-10)
XP VALUE: 175

The bunyip is a large aquatic animal that has the physical charac-
teristics of both seals and sharks. Unlike the former, however, the
bunyip is utterly unable to venture onto land. Like a shark, the
bunyip breathes by means of gills. The bunyip's body is covered
with shaggy black hair and a long mane, which is almost always a
dark grey or black in color.

Although it is not an inherently evil creature, the bunyip is
very mischievous. Because of its great bulk and powerful jaws, a
playing bunyip is quite likely to inflict serious injury on swim-
mers and can overturn small boats.

Combat: The bunyip is able to sense the approach of human be-
ings or similar creatures through a latent sense of telepathy. When
the bunyip notes the presence of such creatures, it may (50%
chance) decide to confront them. To do so, it lifts its head from
the water an unleashes a mighty roar which forces all characters
who are below 4th level to roll successful saving throws vs. rods,
staves, or wands with a —2 penalty or be forced to flee from the
bunyip in panic for 2d4 rounds.

When the bunyip elects to engage in combat, it does so by bit-
ing with its powerful jaws. In combat, the teeth of a bunyip inflict
1d6 points of damage.

If a bunyip comes upon a small creature (a dwarf, gnome, or
halfling, for example) that is swimming or struggling in the water
there is an 80% chance that it attacks the creature. Such an attack
takes the form of a bite that may sever a limb from the victim. If
the bunyip’s attack roll is a natural 20, then a limb has been re-
moved and swallowed by the bunyip. The DM should determine
which limb is lost in accordance with the exact situation or in a
random manner.

Although the bunyip does not normally attack creatures larger
than a dwarf or halfling, there are exceptions. If the bunyip were
attacked, for example, it would certainly defend itself if unable to
flee, no matter how large the attacker.

Like a shark, a bunyip is excited by the smell and taste of
blood, When a bunyip detects traces of blood in the water it may

 

 

(50% chance) enter a feeding frenzy and begin attacking anything
it comes across. In such cases, the bunyip receives a bonus of +2
to its attack rolls. However, because the bunyip is unable to prop-
erly defend itself while in a feeding frenzy, its enemies also receive
a bonus of +2 on their attack rolls.

Habitat/Society: The bunyip is a solitary creature that spends
much of its time swimming about and harassing other creatures.
Bunyips prefer to dwell in open water, such as lakes or rivers, but
can sometimes be found in swamps and marshes.

The diet of a bunyip is made up primarily of fish and other
aquatic creatures. From time to time, they have been known to
lunge at creatures on the edge of the water or at low-flying birds
and such, but this is done only when the local food supply is low.

Ecology: Once per year, a bunyip seeks out a mate and the two
travel to the sea. Once they reach salt water, the female under-
goes slight physiological changes and the actual mating occurs.
Three months later, she gives birth to a single pup that remains
with her for the first two years of its life. Shortly after the pup is
born, the father leaves, returning to his former home to await the
next mating season.

When the pup is old enough, the mother turns it out and, like
the father, returns to her former home. At this point, the pup has
only 3 Hit Dice and its bite causes only 1d4 points of damage. In
all other ways, however, it is similar to its parents.

For the next three years, the pup will be too young to mate.
With the coming of its sixth year, however, it will join the bunyip
mating rituals.

Although bunyip meat is safe for human consumption, it is un-
usually oily and rather strong tasting. Thus they are not hunted
by most cultures.

The hide of a bunyip can be made into a rugged leather, but it
has no special qualities to set it above other, easier to hunt, ani-
mals. This being the case, the bunyip is also free from molestation
by trappers.
Burbur

      
 
 

  

 

    

ES ge TS
FORGOTTEN REALINS

ee

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any land
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary

     

 

 

 

 

TREASURE:
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1-4
ARMOR CLASS: 9
MOVEMENT: 12
‘HIT! 1
Sea 20
‘NO, OF ATTACKS: 1 bite (affects slimes, mosses,
and molds only)
DAMAGP/ATTACK: 2-8
Nil
Immunities
Nil
T (6" to 1’ long)
Irregular (5-7)
XP VALUE: 35

Burburs are small creatures that look much like worms.

They have large, glistening black eyes and a sucking tube for a
mouth, much like that of a mosquito. Just behind the creature's
head are a pair of tiny forelegs of considerable dexterity. With its
forelegs, a burbur can climb, grip, and manipulate objects. A bur-
bur that has just fed will be very bloated and somewhat sluggish.

Burburs are ivory or yellow in color and have soft, moist skin.
They have a somewhat spicy body odor that has been described
as smelling like cinnamon.

Burburs are highly prized creatures that consume many vari-
eties of slimes, mosses, and molds that might otherwise cause
considerable harm to other creatures.

Combat: Burburs are very gentle and harmless creatures as far
as the humanoid races are concerned. They feed only on slimes,
molds, or mosses and are wholly unable to inflict damage on any
other living thing.

When it decides to feed, a burbur simply crawls out onto the
body of the creature it intends to consume, extends its feeding
tube and begins to siphon up its meal. Each round that it feeds,
the burbur inflicts 2d4 points of damage to the slime, mold, or
moss it is consuming. Once the burbur has scored a hit against the
creature it is attempting to ingest, it need not roll again unless it
takes a break in its feeding. A burbur ceases feeding after it has
drained its victim of hit points equal to thrice its own initial value.
For example, a burbur with 4 hit points will be sated after it has
inflicted 12 points of damage to its victim.

A burbur is utterly immune to the attacks of such creatures as
olive or green slime, obliviax moss, and brown, yellow, or russet
molds. In addition, it finds these creatures to be delicacies beyond
compare.

The burbur is also unaffected by yellow musk creepers, zy-
goms, and violet fungi, although it finds these creatures utterly
inedible. A burbur is affected normally by oozes, jellies, poison-
ous vapors, and other creatures, as well as by spell attacks.

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Burburs wander constantly in search of food.
Although they are normally found alone, they have been known
to gather in groups of as many as four individuals to feed on a sin-
gle slime, mold, or moss.

Once every year, usually in the spring, a burbur will begin to
swell in size. At this point it develops a bulge at the end of its tail,
which forms into a second head. As the second head forms, a pair
of forelegs begins to grow out from the body. Shortly thereafter,
the burbur splits in half to form two separate creatures.

Ecology: The burbur is much sought after by adventurers who
find the creatures a useful ally when they do battle against slimes
and similar horrors. As a rule, burburs are extremely docile and
do not attack their keepers or stray unless they are underfed. In
order to keep a burbur content so that it does not seek to escape
its owner, it must be allowed to feed at least once per day.

In the marketplace, a captive burbur can be sold for as much as
1,000 gold pieces.

Although a small and defenseless creature like the burbur
might normally be expected to fall victim to a wide variety of
other predators, this is not the case. Most animals have long ago
learned that eating a burbur can be a painful and, often, fatal mis-
take. If the burbur has recently fed, most creatures that consume
it are affected as if they had come into contact with the creature
the burbur recently fed upon. Thus those animals foolish or hun-
gry enough to devour a burbur have been weeded out by natural
selection a long time ago.

Burburs often build small lairs that they visit from time to time
to rest and recover from injuries. As a rule, these are located in
out-of-the-way places and, as often as not, are protected by some
creature the burbur is immune to. For example, it is not uncom-
mon for a burbur to seek refuge in the midst of a yellow musk
creeper's coils.
Claw, Crawling

= = — a —
FORGOTTEN REALINS

   

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Swarm
ACTIVITY CYCLE: “Any
DIET: Special

i i Non- (0)
TREASURE: Any
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1-20
ARMOR CLASS: 7
MOVEMENT: 9
HIT DICE: 2-4 hit points
THACo: a 20
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4 (armored foes)

1-6 (unarmored foes)

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below
SIZE: ~T (human hand)
MORALE: Fearless (19-20)
XP VALUE: 35

The much feared crawling claw is frequently employed as a
guardian by those mages and priests who have learned the secret
of its creation.

No single description of a crawling claw is possible as they are
not uniform in appearance. Since claws are the animated remains
of hands or paws of living creatures, they are apt to be found ina
wide variety of shapes and sizes.

Combat: When a claw detects a potential victim, it leaps to the
attack. Although it may not appear to be capable of such a feat,
its great strength enables it to do so. The maximum distance a
claw can leap is 15 feet.

Once a claw lands on its victim, it attacks in one of two ways. If
the victim is wearing metal armor, the claw delivers a powerful
blow that inflicts 1d4 points of damage. Against those who are
not armored (or only wearing leather) the claw can employ its
great strength in a crushing grip. This manner of attack causes
1d6 points of damage.

In some cases, a claw may be instructed to attempt to strangle
or gouge out the eyes of a victim. In any such case, the DM should
consider all aspects of the situation and determine how much, if
any, damage is done.

Claws are immune to any form of death magic or raise dead
spells, although a resurrection spell renders them immobile for a
number of turns equal to the level of the caster. Claws have the
same resistance to charm, sleep, and hold spells that undead do,
but claws are not subject to turning, control undead spells, or
damage by holy water, Cold-based spells make claws brittle so
that all rolls to damage them are increased by 1 point per die.

Edged weapons inflict only half damage on a claw; all magical
weapons cause damage as if they were not enchanted in any way
(although to hit bonuses still apply).

Society/Habitat: Crawling claws are nothing more than the ani-
mated hands and paws of once-living creatures. As such, they
have no culture or society to speak of. Despite this, crawling
claws do have a limited ability to communicate with each other.

 

 

 

 

This takes the form of a basic telepathic link between all the claws
of a single “batch.” Whenever one claw finds a victim, all of the
others in the area who were made at the same time move in to
help it.

In addition, claws that have been instructed to do so can act in
concert with each other to move large objects. The DM should
use five pounds per claw as a reasonable limit to the weight that
can be moved.

Ecology: Crawling claws can be created by any mage or priest
who has knowledge of the techniques required to do so. To begin
with, the creator must assemble the severed limbs that are to ani-
mated. The maximum number of claws that can be created at any
one time is equal to the level of the person enchanting them. The
hands (or paws) can be either fresh, skeletal, or at any stage of de-
composition in between.

Claws can be controlled in one of two ways: directly or via pro-
gramming. The manner of a claw’s control must be specified
when it is created and cannot be changed thereafter. All of the
claws in a particular batch must be controlled in the same
manner.

Programmed claws are given a single, brief instruction that
they attempt to carry out to the best of their ability. The maxi-
mum length of the programming, in words, is 15 plus the level of
the creator. This programming sets the conditions under which
the claw attack. A sample command might be: Kill anyone except
me who opens this chest

Directly controlled claws are manipulated by the thoughts of
their creator. The mental effort of controlling claws is quite tiring
and cannot be maintained for more than three consecutive rounds
without a one-round rest. Further, the range of such control is
limited to ten feet plus five feet per level of the creator. A person
controlling claws cannot undertake spellcasting or any other ac-
tivity. Injury to a controller does not break his control unless un-
consciousness results. If direct control is broken for some reason,
the claws continue to follow the last orders they were given.
Cloaker

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any subterranean
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary

v High (13-14)
TREASURE: Cc
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral
NO. APPEARING: 14
ARMOR CLASS: 3(1)
MOVEMENT: 1, Fl15 (D)
HIT DICE: 6
NO. OF ATTACKS; Pl

|. OF “KS: pear Bale phe

DAMAGH/ATTACK: 1-6/1-6/ + special
SPECIAL ATTACKS: | See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil
SIZE: L (8' long)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 1,400

Cloakers are fiendish horrors that dwell in dark places far be-
neath the surface of the earth. They generally seek to kill those
who enter their lairs, unless they can think up some other, more
amusing way to punish interlopers.

When a cloaker is first seen, it is almost impossible to distin-
guish this monster from a common black cloak. The monster's
back has two rows of black eye spots running down it that look
much like buttons, and the two ivory-colored claws on its upper
edge can easily be mistaken for bone clasps.

When it unfurls itself and moves to attack, however, its true
nature becomes all too obvious. At this point, its white underside
is clear and the monster's face is fully visible. This face, with the
glow of its two piercing, red eyes and the needle-like fangs that
line its mouth, is a truly horrible sight. At this point, the monster
also uncurls the whip-like tail at its trailing edge and begins to
swish it back and forth in anticipation.

Combat: When a cloaker strikes at its victim, it moves with
blinding speed. Without warning, the cloaker flies at its target
and, if the attack roll is successful, engulfs its prey within its
folds. Any creature that falls victim to this attack is all but help-
less and can be bitten easily (no roll required) for 1d4 points of
damage plus the victim's unadjusted Armor Class. Thus, an ad-
venturer in chain mail (AC 5) suffers 1d4+5 points of damage
each round. Shields offer no protection from such attacks.

While it is devouring its chosen victim, the cloaker uses its
whip-like tail to inflict 1d6 points of damage on those who move
in to help rescue the captive. The tail is AC 1 and can be cut off if a
total of 16 points of damage are inflicted upon it.

Any attacks made on the cloaker inflict half their damage to the
cloaker and the other half to the trapped victim. Area effect
spells, such as fireball, cause full damage to both the monster and
its victim.

The cloaker can also emit a special subsonic moan of increasing
intensities. Although this power is blocked by stone or other
dense materials, it can be very effective in an open chamber.
Cloakers may not moan and bite during the same round. A
cloaker may emit one of four types of moan each round.

The first intensity of moaning causes unease and numbs the
minds of those within 80 feet of the cloaker. The immediate effect

 

 

 

 

 

of this moan is to cause a —2 penalty to the victims’ attack and
damage rolls against the cloaker. Further, any creature that is
forced to listen to the moan for six consecutive rounds is tempo-
rarily forced into a trance that renders it unable to attack or de-
fend itself as long as the moaning continues.

The second intensity of moaning acts as a fear spell. All crea-
tures within 30 feet of the cloaker must roll a successful saving
throw vs. spell or flee in terror for two rounds.

The third intensity of moaning causes nausea and weakness
and affects all those in a cone 30 feet long and 20 feet wide at its
open end. Anyone caught in this area must roll a successful sav-
ing throw vs. poison or be overcome by nausea and weakness for
1d4+1 rounds. During this time, those who fail their saving
throws are unable to act in any manner.

The fourth and final intensity of moaning acts as a hold person
spell. This power can be used on only one person at a time, has a
range of 30 feet, and lasts for five rounds.

Each of the various effects of the cloaker’s moan can be de-
feated by the use of a neutralize poison spell on a victim.

Cloakers also have the power to manipulate shadows. Known
as shadow shifting, this power can be used in a number of ways,
but in only one particular manner at any given time. The cloaker
can employ its shadow shifting ability to obscure its opponents’
vision, thus bettering its Armor Class to 1. Or the creature can
produce precise images from the shadows that can be used to trick
its adversaries. One common means of employing these images is
to create a duplicate of the cloaker to draw away enemy attacks.
If this method of shadow shifting is employed, it can be treated as
a mirror image spell that creates 1d4 +2 images.

A light spell cast directly at a specific cloaker blinds it and pre-
vents it from using its shadow shifting powers.

Habitat/Society: The thought processes of cloakers are utterly
alien to most other life forms. As such, they can only be commu-
nicated with by mages who have devoted long hours to training
their minds in the arcane discipline necessary to understand these
creatures.

Ecology: It is believed that cloakers are asexual, although no
definitive proof of this has ever been found.
Darkenbeast

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN:
FREQUENCY:
ORGANIZATION:

 
    
 

 

  
 

 
 

ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: see below
ARMOR CLASS: 4
MOVEMENT: 18

r aos 29 84s
THACC 19

). OF lor3
DAMAGE/ATTAC) 1-4/1-4/3-12
SPECIAL ATTACK: Rear claws 1-4/1-4

 
 

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Immune to mind control
pg E: 25%
MM (4's!)
ees Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 975

The darkenbeast, also known as the death horror, is a normal ani-
mal that has been magically transformed into a savage beast un-
der the control of the mage responsible for its transformation.

The darkenbeast resembles a cross between a miniature
wyvern and a pterodactyl. It has a black, reptilian hide, fangs and
claws, and dimly glowing red eyes. The darkenbeast measures
three to four feet long and has a wingspan of six feet.

Combat: The darkenbeast attacks with either its fangs or a com-
bination of fangs and claws. The bite inflicts 3d4 points of dam-
age while each claw causes 1d4 points.

Darkenbeasts suffer a —1 penalty to their attack rolls when ex-
posed to bright light.

These creatures operate under the telepathic direction of the
mage who created them and thus do not check for morale. They
are immune to mind- or monster-controlling spells. They cannot
be summoned by another wizard. However, if a darkenbeast is
ordered to attack its normal master (for example, a dog’s owner),
the beast resists the order if it rolls a successful saving throw vs.
spell. In this case, the creature remains as a darkenbeast but it
again acts as its normal self and obeys its true master.

Habitat/Society: The darkenbeast is a magical creation with a
limited existence. A mage casts the darkenbeast spell on one or
more normal animals, usually domestic or local animals, such as
sheep and dogs. Only animals of 2 Hit Dice or less are affected.

The affected animals are transformed into darkenbeasts within
three rounds. The spell can be cast only in the absence of sunlight
(i.e., at night or indoors). The transformation lasts until they are
exposed to daylight; at that time any living or dead darkenbeasts
revert to their natural form.

Darkenbeasts automatically obey the telepathic commands of
their creator, thus they do not need to be trained or controlled by
means such as leashes, verbal commands, or gestures. The mage
can give the darkenbeasts limited orders based on mental images.
The darkenbeasts then hunt down or pursue the quarry portrayed
in those images. The darkenbeasts carry out this task until the
task is accomplished, the darkenbeasts are slain, or daylight
breaks the spell.

 

 

 

 

 

Regardless of the nature of the original animals used, all
darkenbeasts are carnivorous. Because the spell uses local ani-
mals, the mage gains several advantages over using other, perma-
nent beasts. He can replace his creations as needed; because of the
daylight reversion, darkenbeasts leave little trace of their exist-
ence; adventurers who slay the monsters face the wrath of the
livestock’s proper owners when they discover their animals dead.

Ecology: Darkenbeasts are useful when a mage needs allies or
distractions to use against a foe. Mages dwelling in subterranean
regions away from daylight may keep a permanent pack of
darkenbeasts as guard animals.

 

Create Darkenbeast
4th-Level Wizard Spell
(Alteration)

Range: 10 yards/level
Components: V, S, M
Duration: Special
Casting time: 4

Area of Effect: Special
Saving throw: None

This spell enables a mage to transform one or more mammals
into darkenbeasts. The animals to be transformed must all be
within a 20-foot-diameter circle. The spell automatically af-
fects ordinary, nonmagical mammals of animal or semi-
intelligence. Animals with an Intelligence of 5 or more get a
saving throw to resist the spell. Only animals of 2 Hit Dice or
less are affected by this spell. Humans, humanoids, and demi-
humans are immune. The mage can transform one animal for
each level of his experience.

The spell can be cast only in darkness (i.e., night, inside, or
underground) and its effects last until daylight strikes the
darkenbeast. At that time, the creature automatically reverts
to its true form. Slain darkenbeasts also revert at this time.
The spell sun ray or a magical sun sword breaks the spell, but a
continual light spell has no effect.

The material component is dried wyvern’s blood

 

 

 
Death, Crimson

 

 

 

 

   

  

 

  
   

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Bogs, swamps
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ae CNR ght

L E “Genius (17-18)
TREASURE: 4
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: 1
ARMOR CLASS: 0 (4)
MOVEMENT: FI 12, Fl 6 after feeding (B)
‘HIT DICE: a
‘NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGEJ/ATTACK: 3-30
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC ; 95%.
SIZE eee ee) ;
MORALE me Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: 10,000

The crimson death is a malevolent, vaporous creature that feeds
on the bodily fluids of its victims.

The body of the crimson death is a humanoid-shaped cloud of
pale color. It is difficult to distinguish if seen against fog and
nearly invisible to infravision. During this time, the creature has
an initiative bonus of +4. When the creature is fed, it develops a
crimson flush that is easily visible by normal or infravision. The
cloud possesses humanoid features. The fingers elongate into ten-
tacles when it is feeding.

The crimson death's language is a barely audible series of whis-
pers. It can communicate with other vaporous beings such as air
elementals. It communicates with humanoids only if it is their
captive.

Combat: The monster attacks only to feed or defend itself. It
surrounds its victim with vaporous tentacles. Whenever it hits,
the tentacles drain bodily fluids and cause 3410 points of damage.

The creature is normally immaterial (AC 0) and can be struck
only by magical weapons of +2 or better. After feeding, the crea-
ture attains solidity (AC 4) for six turns. At this time the creature
turns red, moves more slowly (FI 6), and can be struck by magical
weapons of +1 or better.

When a crimson death dies, it immediately dissipates into the
air while its undigested fluids fall to the ground in a grotesque
shower.

The crimson death is able to carry loads by levitating anything
surrounded by its vaporous mass. Despite its vaporous nature,
the crimson death possesses strength equal to a normal human. It
is able to carry a passive weight equal to an adult human. If it at-
tempts to pick up a struggling victim, it must make a successful
attack roll for each round it carries the person. Failure means the
person drops to the ground (suffering damage appropriate to the
height of the fall).

Habitat/Society: The crimson death dwells in the bogs and
marshes where chill and damp prevail. The creature is nearly in-
visible in its native habitat.

 

 

 

 

 

The crimson death is a secretive creature. It prefers to feed on
solitary beings, since these are easy to sneak up on and have no
allies to lend them support. If several people are present, the crim-
son death tries to pick off the guard while the others sleep; it then
feeds on the others at its leisure. In order to conceal its presence,
the crimson death disposes of corpses in its lair or a deep bog.

It maintains a lair in a thicket, undercut bank, or a hollow
space under a windfall. There the monster stores the valuables it
collects from its victims. These can be used as bribes for human-
oid allies or bait for intended victims. The lair may also contain
the remains of past victims.

The crimson death prefers to feed on humanoids. It normally
requires one victim per week. If more people are available, the
monster may feed continuously until destroyed or driven off.

Legends tell of a connection between crimson deaths and vam-
pires. One tale suggests that, when an undead vampire is de-
stroyed, its spirit is transformed into a crimson death. Another
tale suggests that, when a vampire is created, the monster's lost
soul is reborn elsewhere as a crimson death. This legend also sug-
gests that a vampire may be restored to normal life if it is rejoined
by its crimson death counterpart. A third legend says that ex-
tremely evil air elementals are condemned and cast out into the
Prime Material plane in the forms of crimson deaths.

Ecology: The crimson death is a dangerous predator that roams
the swamps like a living ghost. A crimson death can be collected
and imprisoned in an airtight container. This does not harm it. A
crimson death in such a container may be mistaken for, or mis-
labeled as, a bottled djinn or magical vapor. If someone releases
the crimson death, the starving creature immediately attacks its
unwitting rescuer.

Crimson deaths are aware of the advantages of alliances. They
may agree to cooperate with evil humanoids who can provide
them with a steady supply of victims. They make excellent allies
for those dwelling in or near their lairs.
Dinosaurs

{SESS REALINS

   

 

 

Dinosaurs are reptiles, their name being derived from the Greek
“terrible lizard,” that are descended from a variety of the species
called thecodonts. The two orders of dinosaurs are saurischians
(“lizard-hipped dinosaurs”) and ornithischians (“bird-hipped di-
nosaurs”). All carnivorous dinosaurs fall into the former order.
All armored and horned dinosaurs fall into the latter order.

Because of the nature of time in planes where magic works, di-
nosaurs widely separate in time are discussed hereunder, for they
can be found intermingled on some alternate world, strange
plane, or isolated continent somewhere. Great detail will not be
given to any one kind, but all major forms are depicted.

Dinosaurs are typically larger than any other naturally occur-
ring creatures encountered by adventurers. While some species
are drab or blend in with their surroundings, some are quite
colorful—as are some of the smaller reptile species. Many dino-
saurs look ferocious, with large heads full of sharply pointed
teeth, but even those that look friendly at first glance can be dan-
gerous because of their size or tremendous appetites.

Combat: Dinosaurs could not have survived for as long as they
have if they were incapable of defending themselves and finding
sufficient food—sometimes by particularly violent means. The
larger carnosaurs favor attacks that hold prey with their claws,
while they crush it with their powerful jaws. Smaller carnosaurs
often hunt in packs, ambushing prey or relentlessly chasing it un-
til it is captured. The jaws of these littler dinosaurs may be smaller
than those of their larger cousins, but the teeth are every bit as
sharp! Most herbivorous dinosaurs defend themselves with built-
in armor plating or sheer size, but even these can cause considera-
ble damage if they step on their enemies by rearing up on their
hind legs or trampling. Some have long tails that can suddenly
lash out at a foe.

Tt must be borne in mind that all of these reptiles are extremely
stupid—some sauropods, despite their massive size, have brains
the size of walnuts. No dinosaur is as intelligent as a horse or the
family dog—a dinosaur's primary motivation is hunger. The
predatory types are both ferocious and voracious. The herbivo-
rous dinosaurs are likewise insatiable eaters, but they tend either
to ignore anything that appears both inedible and nonthreaten-
ing, or to flee in panic from anything that appears dangerous.

Certain plant eaters, however, are aggressive in their defense,
and these sorts are dangerous, notably the stegosaurs, ankylo-
saurs, and ceratopians.

The larger marine dinosaurs might overturn vessels to get at
the “food” aboard, or they might snatch unsuspecting creatures
from the decks of passing ships. Land carnivores pursue anything
that looks or smells edible, ceasing pursuit only when the prey
has obviously moved completely out of their grasp. Herbivorous
dinosaur herds might stampede in virtually any direction, as long
as it is away from one of the big meat-eaters. Any creature di-
rectly in the path of such a stampede will be carried along or
killed—the latter if smaller, slower, and weaker.

Habitat/Society: Herbivorous dinosaurs are dependent on a
plentiful supply of plants for food, and carnivorous dinosaurs are
dependent on a plentiful supply of herbivorous dinosaurs for
food, so for the most part both types of dinosaurs live in such re-
gions. A jungle or swamp, of course, would be ideal, but there is
no reason why a dinosaur could not happily dwell in a sylvan for-
est or grassy plain. Deserts, high mountains, and frozen wastes
are out, but dinosaurs could be found virtually anywhere else.
Most dinosaurs are solitary in their habits, but many her-
bivores, especially the ornithopods and ceratopians, tend to
travel in herds. Some of the smaller carnosaurs hunt in packs.
For the most part, dinosaur family life is like that of other rep-
tiles. Dinosaurs lay eggs, and then abandon them to hatch on

their own. Once hatched, the baby dinosaur immediately sets out
to find something to eat, an instinct that drives it for its entire life.
An individual might range over thousands of miles, moving sea-
sonally to find food, or it might settle down and spend its whole
life in an area of only a few hundred square yards. Some of these
dinosaurs are territorial, attacking outsiders on sight.

Ecology: Placing dinosaurs into a campaign requires no more
planning—and no less—than that required for including any
other type of monster. Scientists do not clearly understand why
dinosaurs disappeared on some worlds, but if those events had
not occurred, these giant reptiles would still be roaming about in
search of food.

Dinosaur Family Tree: Faced with only an alphabetical listing,
it can be difficult to determine the interrelationships between the
various species described here. The following paragraphs place
the creatures listed here into family groupings.

The dinosaurs proper include the ornithischians and sauris-
chians, distinguished from each other by the underlying shape of
their hip bones. Other relatives in the following pages include the
pterosaurs, or flying reptiles.

A few fishes and turtles have also found their way into these
pages, on account of their ferocity, size, and primitive state of de-
velopment.

Fishes: Dinichthys
Reptiles: These include the synapsids, chelonia (turtles and tor-
toises), ichthyosaurs, placodonts, plesiosaurs, and lacertilians
(lizards), as well as the archosauromorphs and the later “true
dinosaurs” —the saurischians and ornithischians, and their rela-
tives the thecodontians and pterosaurs.
Synapsids: These forerunners of the mammal-like reptiles
include the pelycosaurs and therapsids.
Pelycosaurs: Dimetrodon
Chelonia (turtles and tortoises): Archelon
Ichthyosaurs: Temnodontosaurus
Placodonts: Nothosaurus
Plesiosaurs: Elasmosaurus, plesiosaurus
Lacertilians (lizards): Mosasaurus
Archosauromorphs: Tanystropheus
Thecodontians: These include the earliest “ruling reptiles,”
such as the ornithosuchians.
Ornithosuchians: Euparkeria
Pterosaurs: Pteranodon, pterosaurus
Saurischians: These include the coelurosaurs (ancestors of
the birds), carnosaurs, prosauropods, and sauropods.
Coelurosaurs: Compsognathus, deinonychus, podoke-
saurus, struthiomimus
Carnosaurs: Allosaurus (antrodemus), ceratosaurus,
dilophosaurus, megalosaurus, teratosaurus, tyranno-
saurus
Prosauropods: Anchisaurus, massospondylus, pla-
teosaurus
Sauropods: Brachiosaurus, brontosaurus (apatosau-
rus), camarasaurus, cetiosaurus, diplodocus, mamen-
chisaurus
Ornithischians: These include the ceratopians, ornithopods,
stegosaurs, and ankylosaurs.
Ceratopians: Monoclonius, pentaceratops, styraco-
saurus, triceratops
Ornithopods: Camptosaurus, iguanodon, lam-
beosaurus, trachodon (anatosaurus)
Stegosaurs: Stegosaurus, dacentrurus, kentrosaurus
Ankylosaurs: Ankylosaurus and paleocinthus

 
CoE a

Dinosaurs

 

 
Allosaurus to Archelon

ALINS
_

¢

 

 

 

ALIGNMENT:

Solitary
Day

 

NO. APPEARING:
CLASS:

‘SPECIAL DEFENSES
MAGIC RESISTANC

Allosaurus (Antrodemus}

One of the most vicious of predators, this monster can run across
hard ground at great speed. In size, the allosaurus is between its
two relatives, the smaller megalosaurus and the larger tyranno-
saurus rex.

The allosaurus has a massive skull, formed of bony plates that
give it strength. The design of these plates is such that the head is
still light enough to snap quickly at its prey.

Besides feeding on the occasional brontosaurus and diplodo-
cus, this “flesh lizard” is known to eat carrion.

Few other creatures are foolish enough to fight the allosaurus
for a share of its meal.

Anchisaurus

This bipedal herbivore feeds upright from time to time, but
spends most of its time on all fours. If there is vegetation large
enough nearby, it will climb to escape small predators. Its teeth
are sharp enough to deliver retaliatory bites upon opponents, but
the anchisaurus will not start a fight.

Ankylosaurus

This armadillo-like ornithischian weighs four or five tons—most
of this weight being its armor plating, side spines, and great
knobbed tail. If attacked or threatened, this creature will lash its
tail, delivering blows of considerable force.

 

Paleocinthus

In the same family as the ankylosaurus, the paleocinthus is a veri-
table walking dreadnought, for its heavy plated skin, sharp side
spines, and spiked tail make it nearly invulnerable to attack. A
predator trying to bite one is likely to suffer 3d4 points of damage
upon itself if it scores a hit! Of course, the paleocinthus will lash
its thorny tail to drive off its attacker. This plant eater might be-
come aggressive if intruded upon.

Archelon (Ischyras)

This large marine turtle is not truly a dinosaur, but a reptile. Its
shell is like that of a leatherback turtle—thick and rubbery rather
than being formed of solid plates. With its powerful front flip-
pers, the archelon is a fast swimmer; it seldom ventures onto dry
land.
Brachiosaurus to Camptosaurus

 

 

 

 

Brachiosaurus Brontosaurus

        
 
 

  
 

   
 
 
 

ORGANIZATION:
ACTIVITY CYCLE:

Solitary
Day e

ALIGNMENT: Nil Nil

Camarasaurus

 

NO, APPEARING: 16 1-6

 

See belo
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil Nil

     
   

      

S ut : 5} long) 70!" )
MORALE: Steady (12) Steady (12)
XP VALUE: 28,000 22,000
Brachiosaurus

The heaviest of all dinosaurs, this monster dwells in warm
swamps and lakes. The brachiosaurus's long front feet are
deadly—if it steps on something small, the giant beast inflicts
8d10 points of damage.

The brachiosaurus is the largest dinosaur in the family of
sauropods. This great creature is the largest land animal known,
for the length of 75 feet given above is an average—there are un-
verified reports that some relatives of the brachiosaurus are as
large as 130 feet long. The brachiosaurus can easily reach the tops
of trees with its 40-foot height, half of that being its long neck.

It weighs in at an ungainly 90 tons, three times as much as its
relative, the brontosaurus. (A whale, the largest marine animal,
is typically 100 feet long and 150 tons.) To support its great bulk,
the brachiosaurus spends literally all of its waking hours eating.
With its tiny brain, it is unlikely to notice interlopers in its
range—but then who would be foolish enough to attack a brachi-
osaurus?

Brontosaurus (apatosaurus)

The “thunder lizard” is a 40-ton plant-eater found near marshes
and lakes. The creature spends much of its time in shallow water
to support its bulk (and because food is plentiful there), but never
moves to deep water because the increase in pressure makes it im-
possible for the tremendous dinosaur to breathe.

Apatosaurus ignores small things, but it is prone to step on
anything in its way (causing 4d10 points of damage).

The body of the brontosaur is 65 feet long, but the tiny head is
less than two feet of that—a man with the same dimensions
would stand six feet tall, but have a head only two inches long!
The brontosaurus tips the scale at a mere 30 tons, rather light for
a sauropod.

sles
Stampede
Nil Nil

  

alt
ong)

‘Average (9)
15-65

~ G(50' lon
Average (10)
10,000

The front legs of the brontosaurus are shorter than those in the
rear, like all sauropods except the brachiosaurus. This configura-
tion enables sauropods to get up on their back feet to reach the
topmost leaves of a tree. The brontosaurus could also use this
ability to fight against its principal enemy, the allosaurus. The
thunder lizard could tilt itself up on its long back legs, then come
crashing down onto its enemy to inflict Sd10 points of damage.

The brontosaurus's tail can be whipped, causing 1d6 points of
damage to any foe close enough.

Camarasaurus

Yet another sauropod, this swamp-dwelling herbivore is small for
its type. Its fearful nature causes it to live in herds with its fellows,
but the creature still panics more easily than does a brontosaurus.
Stepping or trampling damage is 3d10 points.

Despite being a sauropod, the camarasaurus tends to eat ferns
and leaves of lower branches, so it does not compete for food
with its larger cousins. Herds of camarasauri tend to migrate sea-
sonally, so can be found almost anywhere, depending on the time
of the year.

To help digest its food, the camarasaurus swallows rocks,
which help grind vegetable matter in its large stomach, like a
bird’s gizzard. Presumably, valuable gems might be found in a ca-
marasaurus’s belly, but searching for one would be like looking
for a needle in a haystack.

Camptosaurus

This slow, exceptionally dumb iguanodont is easy prey for any
hungry predator, typically too stupid to run until one of its num-
ber is killed. Anyone caught in a stampede of these creatures must
roll a successful saving throw vs. death ray or be crushed to
death. A herd consists of small, medium, and large individuals.
Te 4a

ORGOTTEN REAL

 

 

Ceratosaurus to Deinonychus a

 

Ceratosaurus

Cetiosaurus

   

Compsognathus

 

THACO:
NO. OF ATTACKS:

SPECIAL DEFENSES:
MAGIC RESISTANCE:

Ceratosaurus

The ceratosaurus, or “horn lizard,” is a carnosaur—related to the
allosaurus and tyrannosaurus rex, but smaller in size. Both heavy
and fast, the ceratosaurus can move on all fours or on its two hind
legs.

This carnivore is unusual in that it has a horn on its nose, but it
does not use the horn for attacking—in fact, only males have this
horn. (Those who have trouble telling dinosaurs apart have no
trouble with the ceratosaurus.) The back of this creature also dis-
tinguishes it from other carnosaurs, for a thin line of bony plates
runs from the top of the ceratosaurus’s head down to the end of
his tail, making the dinosaur’s back look like a giant saw blade.

Also unlike the larger carnosaurs, the ceratosaurus hunts in
pace. and is thus able to bring down creatures much larger than
itself.

Cetiosaurus

These huge plant-eaters dwell in lakes and marshes. Their heads
are somewhat larger than other sauropods, such as the brachio-
saurus, brontosaurus, and diplodocus. If they step on something
small—such as a human—the cetiosaurus's 10 tons of bulk inflicts
4d10 points of damage.

Like its relatives, the cetiosaurus must eat vast quantities of
plants to keep its weight up. The main reason that sauropods
have such large bodies is that they are filled with stomach and in-
testines to process their dietary intake.

 

Compsognathus

Compsognathus is a very small carnivorous dinosaur, about the
size of a chicken. (In fact, compsognathus is related to the earliest
known birds—if it had wings and feathers, it might be a chicken.)
These creatures often hunt in groups. Their small size allows
them to hide, even in packs, and surprise prey—others suffer -3
penalties to their surprise roll. Attacks at night might occur on
sleeping prey, as the compsognathus tends to be nocturnal.

When hunting alone, the compsognathus usually eats lizards
and insects.

Deinonychus

This fast carnivore uses speed, its long, grasping forearms, its
large teeth, and its hind legs with ripping talons in terrible combi-
nation. It hunts by running at prey, leaping, and delivering gut-
ting rakes with its rear legs as it claws and bites. The jumping rear
talon attack is gains a + 2 bonus to the attack roll and delivers 2d6
points of damage. When attacking a larger creature, the deinony-
chus often jumps up on top of it, holding on with its front claws
while continuing its horrible raking attacks.

The deinonychus has a relatively large brain for a dinosaur, so
these pack attacks are often successful.

Despite being 12 feet long, this dinosaur is only about six feet
tall. Its tail extends straight out behind it, held aloft by an intri-
cate structure of bony supports, thus allowing its 150 pounds of
weight to be carried entirely on the back legs.
Dilophosaurus to Diplodocus

 

 

 

  

 

Nil
ALIGNMENT: Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil
NO. APPEARING: 13 1-2 1-4 1 (10% for 2) 16
ARMOR CLASS: Ss 4

    

SPECIAL DEFENSES:

‘Steady (11)
65-175

Average (10)
1,400

MORALE:
XP VALUE:

Dilophosaurus

The weak skull of this monster prevents strong jaw muscle at-
tachments, so it uses its taloned hind feet, especially its spurs, to
inflict horrible wounds on its prey, while its snaky neck strikes to
deliver biting damage. It prefers open areas to jungle, and seldom
ventures into areas thick with trees. Dilophosaurus often hunts
with one or more of its kind, seeking a large dinosaur to kill for a
feast.

One other unusual feature of this carnosaur is its pair of head
crests, which only males of the species have.

Dimetrodon

The sail-backed dimetrodon is a fierce predator and an example
of the mammal-like reptiles. Its large fin works like a solar heater,
allowing the dimetrodon to heat up to active temperature hours
before its prey. Its ability to swim is questionable but likely. The
dimetrodon’s alligator-like jaws give it a powerful bite (3d4 +3
points of damage), more than making up for its lack of claw at-
tacks.

Dinichthys

Dinichthys’s name—“terrible fish”—reveals that this fearsome
creature is not actually a dinosaur but a huge, primitive fish. Its
great mouth can swallow man-sized prey on a natural attack roll
of 20.

7 = 4 6

     

Steady (12)
4,000 2,000 16,000
Temnodontosaurus

Steady (11) Steady (12)

This monster is a large ichthyosaur or “fish lizard.” Although it is
not a dinosaur, it thrives in the same marine habitats as do mosa-
saurs, for example—its young are born live at sea, and the temno-
dontosaurus must come to the surface to breathe.

Its speed and ferocity allow it to compete fearlessly for choice
prey with any creature, When in a feeding frenzy, a temnodonto-
saurus strikes with its powerful tail, inflicting damage on any
creature behind it that is struck by this lashing.

Diplodocus

This dinosaur is another sauropod, like the brachiosaurus, that
eats water plants. Despite being longer than its relatives, the di-
plodocus weighs only about ten tons.

Like the other sauropods, the diplodocus can rear up on its
back legs. If it comes down on anything smaller than itself, the
creature causes 3d10 points of damage.
Elasmosaurus to Iguanodon

 

 

Euparkeria

Elasmosaurus

   
 
 
 

ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: _ Day

Solitary

   

Day Day
Nil Nil 7
Nil Nil

 

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

Elasmosaurus

If not for its long neck and unusual way of hunting, the average
adventurer might not notice that the elasmosaurus is a reptile
rather than a fish. The neck of this oddly shaped beast is fully half
of its length, and its ungainly spine numbers 71 vertebrae. If the
elasmosaurus wanted to, it could curve its neck around behind it-
self, and then continue twisting until it looked forward again.

This reptile hunts by swimming near the surface of the water,
with its head below water but its neck held above.

When the elasmosaurus spots its prey, it snaps its head down
suddenly upon it.

Like the ichthyosaur, the elasmosaurus has no gills, and must
breathe air by swimming to the surface or stretching its head up
above the water. The elasmosaurus must crawl entirely out of the
water to lay its eggs on some sandy beach, and of course the crea-
ture is most vulnerable in this state.

The elasmosaurus is carnivorous and highly aggressive.

Euparkeria

A small dinosaur, probably ancestor to the larger carnosaurs,
such as tyrannosaurus rex and allosaurus, the carnivorous
euparkeria is about the size of a small dog.

The euparkeria is found in groups of 2d4, which attack 1-2 fig-
ures of small size or a single man-sized figure if the odds seem to
be with the pack. If sufficiently hungry, a pack will stalk and at-
tack even a large group of prey, especially if one of the intended
victims is wounded.

While the euparkeria normally walks on all fours, if threatened
it is able to stand up on its hind legs and run a short distance.

 

Gorgosaurus

This horrid creature is probably another ancestor of tyrannosau-
tus rex. The gorgosaurus is a fleet, carnivorous dinosaur of very
aggressive instincts.

Iguanodon

The iguanodon is a more primitive dinosaur that walks on all
fours, but it can stretch up to reach vegetation that looks particu-
larly appealing. The creature looks much like a small sauropod,
about 15 feet tall and 30 feet long, weighing in at only five tons.

Typically traveling in herds, the iguanodon runs from carni-
vores, but if cornered it can employ its thumb spikes and lashing
tail to defend itself.
Lambeosaurus to Megalosaurus

 

 

 

  
    
 
  

ORGANIZATION:
ACTIVITY CYCLE:
TREASURE:
ALIGNMENT:

Mamenchisaurus

 

Massospondylus Megalosaurus

 

 

NO. APPEARING:
ARMOR CLASS:
MOVEMENT:
HIT DICE:
THACO:

NO. OF ATTACKS:
DAMAGE/AT

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil
eo RESISTANCE: Nil
H

MORALE:
XP VALUE:

   
  
 
 

 

 

Lambeosaurus

This unusual looking dinosaur is a hadrosaur, or “duckbilled di-
nosaur,” all of whom have differently shaped crests on their
heads. Other crested dinosaurs include corythosaurus, para-
saurolophus, prosaurolophus, and saurolophus. The lam-
beosaurus is the most peculiar of all of these, for it has two crests,
a hollow one that sticks straight up from its snout and a solid one
pointing back from the top of its head.

This herbivorous dinosaur is able to see, hear, and smell excep-
tionally well, and is thus able to detect enemies frequently and
flee to safety—either outdistancing its predator or hiding in a
swampy area. The lambeosaurus usually travels on all fours, but
when it has to run it is perfectly capable of rearing itself up on its
longer hind legs.

The lambeosaurus is one of the most common of all dinosaurs,
because it can chew up almost any plant that it can get into its
mouth; the lambeosaurus has powerful teeth on the sides of its
mouth, but none at all in front.

Some giant specimens of this dinosaur grow as long as 50 feet.

Mamenchisaurus

The mamenchisaurus is another sauropod, like the brontosaurus
and diplodocus, but much longer and much lighter. This swamp
dwelling herbivore uses its 35-foot-long neck—fully half of its un-
gainly length—to browse the foliage at the very top of nearly any
tree it chooses, simply by standing up on its back legs and reach-
ing for it.

Sages who study such things claim that the mamenchisaurus
has the longest neck of any naturally occurring creature, but it
pays for this extra length. The 19 neck vertebrae of the mamen-
chisaurus are held together by bony struts, so the immense crea-
ture cannot bend its neck except at the head and slightly at the
shoulders.

The mamenchisaurus strikes only in defense, but if it acciden-
tally steps on some small creature (such as a human), it inflicts
3d8 points of damage.

 

al

 

Massospondylus

Another common dinosaur, this seemingly peaceful herbivore is
well equipped with long, sharp teeth for defensive biting. If
attacked—a common occurrence, for the beast is a favorite of
such carnosaurs as tyrannosaurus, deinonychus, and
allosaurus—the massospondylus delivers swift bites and then
runs away.

While this dinosaur’s front claws look like formidable weap-
ons, with five long fingers and a sharp spike on the thumb, the
massospondylus uses these hands only to gather vegetable mate-
rial for food. Like the camarasaurus, the massospondylus swal-
lows stones to help grind the food that it eats.

The massospondylus is stupid, and any approach by strange
creatures might be interpreted as an attack.

Megalosaurus

The megalosaurus is another carnosaur, like the allosaurus and
tyrannosaurus, but is smaller—30 feet long, ten feet tall, and
weighing only one ton. While it is as able as its larger cousins of
functioning bipedally, the megalosaurus often travels on all
fours.

The megalosaurus eats sauropods, like the mamenchisaurus
above, principally using its large jaws and teeth to bring down
any unsuspecting victim. The claws of the megalosaurus, while
sharp, are capable of causing only incidental damage to such gi-
ants as the diplodocus and brachiosaurus.
Monoclonius to Pentaceratops

 

 

 

Monoclonius _ Mosasaurus

 

  

TREASURE: —
ALIGNMENT:

   
    
 

 

SPECIAL DEFENS!
MAGIC RESISTANCE:

Monoclonius

This dinosaur, also known by the name “centrosaurus,” some-
what resembles a single-horned rhinoceros. Its head and neck are
protected by a bony shield (AC 3), while its skin is very thick—
although plated like that of the ankylosaurus.

The monoclonius is herbivorous, and can eat almost any plant
because of its strong jaws and teeth. The head of the monoclonius
is attached to the neck much like a human arm is attached to the
shoulder, so the creature can swing its head in almost any direc-
tion at a moment's notice. The main attack of this dinosaur is thus
its horn, but herds can trample smaller creatures in a charge, with
each monoclonius inflicting 2d8 points of damage.

Mosasaurus

The mosasaurus is a marine lizard, with species such as platecar-
pus and plotosaurus. This reptile breathes air like a crocodile. It
travels very slowly on land, but its flippers move it with ease and
grace through the water. The mosasaurus preys on all forms of
marine animals—its powerful jaws can crack shell or bone easily.

Much of the length of the mosasaurus is due to its large number
of vertebrae, numbering over 100 in some species.

Nothosaurus

The nothosaurus is a particularly aggressive marine dinosaur—
another ichthyosaur. It dwells mostly in tropical seas, always
seeking prey in the water when not sunning itself on rocks in be-
tween hunts. It lumbers on its flippers when on land but swims.
rapidly. When in a frenzy it can lash at its victim with huge fore
flippers, but its usual attack is a darting bite, as its long neck
moves its head at great speed.

 

Ornitholestes

This exceptionally fast carnivore roams the plains hunting small
prey, from insects and eggs to creatures its own size. Although
quite light in weight, it is difficult to strike an ornitholestes be-
cause of its speed. Packs of ornitholestes have been known to at-
tack larger creatures if the dinosaurs significantly outnumber
their victims and they are sufficiently hungry.

Pentaceratops

This is another of the quadrupedal dinosaurs of the ornithischian
order; it is a relative of monoclonius, styracosaurus, and tricera-
tops. The name pentaceratops means “five-horned face,” but the
aggressive herbivore really has only three true horns—the two
apparent horns on the sides of its face are only cheek bones. Its
shield (sometimes reaching over much of the back) and horns give
its head AC 2, while the unprotected parts of its body are AC 6. If
it charges it can trample smaller creatures, inflicting 2d10 points
of damage.
Plateosaurus to Pterosaurus

Lan

 

ORGOTTEN REALINS
ais Sh BSS j

 

Plesiosaurus Podokesaurus Pteranodon Pterosaurus
ORGANIZATION: Herd Solitary tn Flock Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day Day Day Day Day

   
 

TREASURE:
ALIGNMENT:

Nil
Nil

 

NO. APPEARING: 5-20
ARMOR CLASS: 5

~

THACO:
RO. OF “ATTACKS: Nil

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil Nil
‘MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil Nil

Nil Nil Nil
Nil Nil Nil

XP VALUE:

Plateosaurus

The plateosaurus is related to the massospondylus and the
smaller anchisaurus. Like these relatives, the plateosaurus usu-
ally moves about on all fours. When it wants to watch for ene-
mies or to reach the leafy crowns of ferns, palms, or other trees, it
travels slowly in a bipedal manner, using its tail as a balance.
These plant-eaters are fairly heavy (about eight to ten tons on the
average) and panicky.

Plesiosaurus

The plesiosaurus strongly resembles a snake wearing a turtle’s
body (sans shell). It tends to be very aggressive, attacking any-
thing it notices. While not as long overall as its relative, the elas-
mosaurus, the plesiosaurus has a neck that is about one-third of
its total length. The creature is strong and fast, and highly maneu-
verable in the water—it can “turn on a silver piece” to lunge at its
prey. In a marine battle it can strike with its powerful fore flip-
pers, inflicting 2d6 points of damage with each.

Podokesaurus

This swift carnivore, a relative of the compsognathus, hunts in
packs across grassy plains and in forests. It flees larger predators,
but ruthlessly pursues any creature it perceives as potential prey.
Although ten feet long from snout to tail, a podokesaur is thin
and light, weighing only about 50 pounds. Thus these creatures
are very fast and usually attack first. Their speed also accounts
for their fine Armor Class.

Podokesaurus doesn’t worry excessively if appropriate prey
cannot be found—this dinosaur will as soon strike one of its fel-
lows if driven by hunger.

 

Pteranodon

Although this flying reptile typically dives for marine prey, it at-
tacks any creature that appears to be vulnerable. The pteranodon
has no teeth, but spears victims with its beak if they are too large
to swallow at a gulp.

The beak of a typical pteranodon is about four feet long. The
creature weighs only 40 to 50 pounds, but it can carry off prey
four times its own weight.

Pterosaurus

This ghastly looking creature has a ten-foot-long snake-like neck
and long jaws—truly a nightmare to behold. Even though its
lower jaw has no teeth, it can inflict great wounds when swoop-
ing upon prey. The size of this dinosaur’s shadow approaches that
of the roc, which has a slightly larger wingspan of 60 feet.

The pterosaurus swoops down on prey from high in the sky,
thus causing a -3 penalty to opponents’ surprise roll. If the ptero-
saurus surprises an opponent, it has swooped down at double
speed to attack (with a +4 bonus to its attack roll), and any dam-
age thus inflicted is doubled. Although a pterosaurus weighs only
about 75 pounds, it can carry prey of three or four times that
weight.

The pterosaurus is the dinosaur soulmate of the vulture; the gi-
ant flyer will eat carrion if nothing else suitable presents itself.
Stegosaurus to Tanystropheus

  
   
  

     

FORGOTTEN RE

[ et

 

Stegosaurus Dacentrurus

 

      

Kentrosaurus

 

Struthiomimus Styracosaurus — Tanystropheus

 

 

Stegosaurus

Another of the ornithischians, the stegosaurus, or “plated lizard,”
is a large, very stupid herbivorous dinosaur with aggressive de-
fenses. It thrives nearly anywhere and is often found in plains or
jungles. Its great plates allow the creature to defend 90% of the
time at AC 2. Its spiked tail, with four or more bony spikes of one
to over two feet in length, has its own brain. The stegosaurus
turns its rear continually toward an enemy, while tucking its head
low. If anything near it seems threatening, it reacts in this man-
ner.

Dacentrurus

This creature looks like a stegosaurus with long, sharp spikes in-
stead of plates along its back and tail. It is an aggressive defender,
dwelling mainly in areas of heavy vegetation. When attacked, its
active defense allows it a 75% probability of being AC 3. Attack-
ers are also 25% likely to have to suffer an attack resulting in 148
points damage when striking at this dinosaur’s neck, back, or tail.
The dacentrurus continually turns itself so that its lashing tail can
strike opponents.

Kentrosaurus

This dinosaur appears to be a cross between a stegosaurus and a
dacentrurus. The spine area is protected by bony back plates
from neck to hip sockets. Behind this, sharp, backward-pointing,
spikes run to the tail tip, which it keeps turned toward enemies.
Creatures attacking its rear third have a 25% chance of suffering
an attack resulting in 1d8 points damage. It is 80% likely that it
defends at AC 2. Kentrosaurus is also a jungle dweller.

cat

Steady (12)

Average (10)
1,400 650

Struthiomimus

The struthiomimus is omnivorous. It has to be very hungry to at-
tack men, but smaller humanoids and demihumans look delicious
any time. It prefers areas of tall grass as its habitat.

Styracosaurus

An aggressive plant-eater, styracosaurus charges at anything
threatening. The bony plate gives the head area an AC of 2, and
there is a 50% chance that anything attempting to bite its rear
portions is stabbed by one or more of the sharp frills of the head
plate, each frill inflicting 1d6 points of damage, 1-3 frills possibly
striking. If styracosaurus charges, it tramples smaller creatures,
inflicting 2d8 points of damage.

Tanystropheus

Resembling a snake with thin, projecting legs, the rear set webbed
for swimming, about half the length of tanystropheus is neck and
head. The relatively small head and jaws are long, the latter filled
with many sharp teeth. This carnivore lurks along river banks
and swamp edges, prowling through the waters. Tanystropheus
usually surprises opponents: others suffer a -6 penalty to their
surprise roll. When attacking with surprise, tanystropheus strikes
with a +2 bonus to hit. If the victim is under 500 pounds in
weight, the monster drags it into the water to further attack and
devour it.
Teratosaurus to Tyrannosaurus Re

 

 

Teratosaurus

Trachodon

 
  
 
 

Herd
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day Day

TREASURE Nil Nil
Nil

Triceratops Tyrannosaurus Rex

Herd Solitary
Day Day

Nil Nil
Nil Nil

 

   

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil Nil

Nil Nil

 

XP VALUE:

Teratosaurus

A fierce carnivore found mainly on the plains, the teratosaurus
runs nimbly after any creature that appears to be edible. This
creature hunts only on dry land—plains or forest.
The teratosaurus is another carnosaur, related to megalosau-
allosaurus, ceratosaurus, and tyrannosaurus rex, but the
teratosaurus is more primitive and somewhat heavier.

Trachodon (Anatosaurus)

This duckbilled dinosaur is the archetype of its kind—the name
anatosaurus means “duck lizard.” A peaceful, four-ton plant
eater, the anatosaurus runs from attack; its only defense is its
lashing tail.

Enemies include any of the carnosaurs, but especially tyranno-
saurus rex.

Other hadrosaurs, related to anatosaurus, include the lam-
beosaurus.

Triceratops

The largest of the ceratopians, or horn-faced dinosaurs, and by
far the most aggressive, this beaked herbivore is a plains dweller.
It has a huge front plate of bone protecting its six-foot-long head,
from which project two great horns (each over three feet long),
while a somewhat shorter horn juts from its nose. Its body is not
armored, and thus is only AC 6. The triceratops tips the scales at
over ten tons, compared to the six to eight tons of an elephant
that stands 13 feet high at the shoulder.

Any creature that infringes on the territory of these reptiles is
likely to be charged and speared. Smaller creatures are simply
trampled, suffering 2d12 points of damage.

The triceratops also uses its horns to fight for dominance
within the herd, so it is not unusual to find specimens with past
injuries on their heads.

Tyrannosaurus Rex

There can be no question that this ravenous creature is the most
fearsome and terrible of all carnivorous dinosaurs. Despite its
huge size and eight-ton weight, the monster is swift afoot. Its
huge head is nearly six feet long, and its teeth are from three to six
inches in length.

Tyrannosaurus rex, the “tyrant lizard king,” is a plains dweller,
and so stupidly fierce that it will attack a small triceratops, kill it,
and swallow its head in one gulp—thus killing itself in a matter of
hours as the horns of the victim pierce the stomach of the victor.

This dinosaur's favorite food is any of the hadrosaurs, such as
lambeosaurus and anatosaurus. Of course, this monster pursues
and eats nearly anything, engulfing man-sized creatures whole on
a natural attack roll of 18 or better. Tyrannosaurus also eats car-
rion, chasing away any smaller creatures to steal a meal found
with its keen sense of smell.
   

Dinosaurs

 

Camptosaurus Ceratosaurus Compsognathus Deinonychus
       

= PS =
FORGOTTEN REALINS

Dinosaurs

 

 

Euparkeria

  

Tennodontosaurus

   

   
 

Goig

 

Lambeosaurus Megalosaurus
         
 

Ga

CALING,

renee,
ON

  
     

as
OMEN KR

     

Dinosaurs

 

 

Styracosaurus Tanystropheus Trachodon
      

EE gy OSS =
FORGOTTEN REALINS

       

Dinosaurs

 

Axebeak

Megalotherium

   

— ~«, »
Phorohacos Titanothere Wooley Rhino
Dracolich

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: See below
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
AC rY CYCLE: |

   
 

B,H,S,T |

 

TREASURE:

ALIGNMENT: Evil (any)

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: See below

MOVEMENT: As per former dragon type

     

   
    
 

Breath weapon and spell use

XP VALUE:

As per individual dragon, plus 1,000
(both dracolich and host must be
destroyed)

The dracolich is an undead creature resulting from the unnatural
transformation of an evil dragon. The mysterious Cult of the
Dragon practices the powerful magic necessary for the creation of
the dracolich, though other practitioners are also rumored to exist.

A dracolich can be created from any of the evil dragon sub-
species. A dracolich retains the physical appearance of its original
body, except that its eyes appear as glowing points of light float-
ing in shadowy eye sockets. Skeletal or semi-skeletal dracoliches
have been observed on occasion.

The senses of a dracolich are similar to those of its original
form; it can detect invisible objects and creatures (including those
hidden in darkness of fog) within a 10-foot radius per age cate-
gory and also possesses a natural clairaudience ability while in its
lair equal to a range of 20 feet per age category. A dracolich can
speak, cast spells, and employ the breath weapon of its original
form; it can cast each of its spells once per day and can use its
breath weapon once every three combat rounds. Additionally, a
dracolich retains the intelligence and memory of its original form.

Combat: Dracoliches are immune to charm, sleep, enfeeble-
ment, polymorph, cold (magical or natural), electricity, hold, in-
sanity, and death spells or symbols. They cannot be poisoned,
paralyzed, or turned by priests. They have the same magic resist-
ance as their original forms; only magical attacks from wizards of
6th level or higher, or from monsters of 6 or more Hit Dice have a
chance of affecting dracoliches.

The Armor Class of a dracolich is equal to the Armor Class of
its original form, bettered by —2 (for example, if the AC of the
original form was —1, the AC of the dracolich is —3). Attacks on
a dracolich, due to its magical nature, do not gain any attack or
damage roll bonuses.

Initially, a dracolich has the same morale rating as its original
form. However, after a dracolich is successful in its first battle, its
morale rating permanently becomes Fearless (19 base); this as-
sumes that the opponent or opponents involved in the battle had
a Hit Dice total of at least 100% of the Hit Dice of the dracolich
(for instance, a 16-HD dracolich must defeat an opponent or op-
ponents of at least 16 total HD to receive the morale increase).
Once a dracolich receives the morale increase, it becomes im-
mune to magical fear as well.

 

 

 

 

 

The dracolich has a slightly stronger ability to cause fear in op-
ponents than it did in its original form; opponents must roll their
saving throws vs. spell with a —1 penalty (in addition to any
other relevant modifiers) to resist the dracolich’s fear aura. The
gaze of the dracolich’s glowing eyes can also paralyze creatures
within 40 yards if they fail their saving throws (creatures of 6th
level for 6 Hit Dice] or higher gain a +3 bonus to their saving
throws). If a creature successfully saves against the gaze of a dra-
colich, it is permanently immune to the gaze of that particular
dracolich.

The attack routine of a dracolich is similar to that of its original
form; for example, a dracolich that was originally a green dragon
will bring down a weak opponent with a series of physical at-
tacks, but it will stalk more formidable opponents, attacking at
an opportune moment with its breath weapon and spells.

All physical attacks, such as clawing and biting, inflict the
same damage as the dracolich’s original form, plus 2d8 points of
chilling damage. A victim struck by a dracolich who fails a saving
throw vs. paralyzation is paralyzed for 2d6 rounds. Immunity to
cold damage, temporary or permanent, negates the chilling dam-
age but not the paralyzation. Dracoliches cannot drain life levels.

All dracoliches can attempt undead control (as per a potion of
undead control) once every three days on any variety of undead
with 60 yards. The undead’s saving throws against this power suf-
fer a -3 penalty; if the undead control is successful, it lasts for
one turn only. While undead control is in use, the dracolich can-
not use other spells. If the dracolich interrupts its undead control
before it has been used for a full turn, the dracolich must still wait
three days before the power can be used again.

If a dracolich or proto-dracolich is slain, its spirit immediately
returns to its host. If there is no corpse in range for it to possess,
the spirit is trapped in the host until such a time—if ever—that a
corpse becomes available. A dracolich is difficult to destroy. It
can be destroyed outright by power word, kill or a similar spell. If
its spirit is currently contained in its host, destroying the host
when a suitable corpse is not within range effectively destroys the
dracolich. Likewise, an active dracolich is unable to attempt fur-
ther possessions if its host is destroyed. The fate of a disembodied
dracolich spirit—that is, a spirit with no body or host—is un-
known, but it is presumed that it is drawn to the lower planes.
Dracolich

Habitat/Society: The creation of a dracolich is a complex proc-
ess involving the transformation of an evil dragon by arcane
magical forces, the most notorious practitioners of which are
members of the Cult of the Dragon. The process is usually a coop-
erative effort between the evil dragon and the wizards, but espe-
cially powerful wizards have been known to coerce an evil
dragon to undergo the transformation against its will.

Any evil dragon is a possible candidate for transformation, al-
though old dragons or older with spell-casting abilities are prefer-
red. Once a candidate is secured, the wizards first prepare the
dragon's host, an inanimate object that will hold the dragon’s life
force. The host must be a solid item of not less than 2,000 gp value
resistant to decay (wood, for instance, is unsuitable). A gemstone
is commonly used for a host, particularly ruby, pearl, carbuncle,
and jet, and is often set in the hilt of a sword or other weapon.
The host is prepared by casting enchant an item upon it and
speaking the name of the evil dragon; the item may resist the spell
by successfully saving vs. spell as an 11th-level wizard. If the spell
is resisted, another item must be used for the host. If the spell is
not resisted, the item can then function as a host. If desired, glas-
steel can be cast upon the host to protect it.

Next, a special potion is prepared for the evil dragon to con-
sume. The exact composition of the potion varies according to
the age and type of the dragon, but it must contain precisely seven
ingredients, among them a potion of evil dragon control, a potion
of invulnerability, and the blood of a vampire. When the evil
dragon consumes the potion, the results are determined as fol-
lows (roll percentile dice):

 

Roll Result
01-10 No effect.
11-40 Potion does not work. The dragon suffers 2d12

points of damage and is helpless with convul-
sions for 1-2 rounds.

Potion does not work. The dragon dies. A full
wish or similar spell is needed to restore the
dragon to life; a wish to transform the dragon
into a dracolich results in another roll on this
table.

Potion works.

41-50

51-00

If the potion works, the dragon's spirit transfers to the host, re-
gardless of the distance between the dragon's body and the host.
A dim light within the host indicates the presence of the spirit.
While contained in the host, the spirit cannot take any actions; it
cannot be contacted nor attacked by magic. The spirit can remain
in the host indefinitely.

Once the spirit is contained in the host, the host must be
brought within 90 feet of a reptilian corpse; under no circum-
stances can the spirit possess a living body. The spirit’s original
body is ideal, but the corpse of any reptilian creature that died or
was killed within the previous 30 days is suitable.

The wizard who originally prepared the host must touch the
host, cast a magic jar spell while speaking the name of the dragon,
then touch the corpse. The corpse must fail a saving throw vs.
spell for the spirit to successfully possess it; if it saves, it will never
accept the spirit. The following modifiers apply to the roll:

 

—10 if the corpse is the spirit’s own former body (which can be
dead for any length of time).

—4 if the corpse is of the same alignment as the dragon.

—4 if the corpse is that of a true dragon (any type).

—3 if the corpse is that of a firedrake, ice lizard, wyvern, or fire
lizard.

-1 if the corpse is that of a dracolisk, dragonne, dinosaur,
snake, or other reptile.

 

If the corpse accepts the spirit, it becomes animated by the spirit.
If the animated corpse is the spirit's former body, it immediately
becomes a dracolich; however, it will not regain the use of its
voice and breath weapon for another seven days (note that it will
not be able to cast spells with verbal components during this
time). At the end of seven days, the dracolich regains the use of its
voice and breath weapon.

If the animated corpse is not the spirit’s former body, it immedi-
ately becomes a proto-dracolich. A proto-dracolich has the mind
and memories of its original form, but has the hit points and im-
munities to spells and priestly turning of a dracolich. A proto-
dracolich can neither speak nor cast spells; further, it cannot
cause chilling damage, use a breath weapon, or cause fear as a
dracolich. Its strength, movement, and Armor Class are those of
the possessed body.

To become a full dracolich, a proto-dracolich must devour at
least 10% of its original body. Unless the body has been dis-
patched to another plane of existence, a proto-dracolich can al-
ways sense the presence of its original body, regardless of the
distance. A proto-dracolich will tirelessly seek out its original
body to the exclusion of all other activities. If its original body
has been burned, dismembered, or otherwise destroyed, the
proto-dracolich need only devour the ashes or pieces equal to or
exceeding 10% of its original body mass (total destruction of the
original body is possible only through use of a disintegrate or sim-
ilar spell; the body could be reconstructed with a wish or similar
spell, so long as the spell is cast in the same plane as the disintegra-
tion). If a proto-dracolich is unable to devour its original body, it
is trapped in its current form until slain.

A proto-dracolich transforms into a full dracolich within seven
days after it devours its original body. When the transformation
is complete, the dracolich resembles its original body; it can now
speak, cast spells, and employ the breath weapon of its original
body, in addition to having all of the abilities of a dracolich.

The procedure for possessing a new corpse is the same as ex-
plained above, except that the assistance of a wizard is no longer
necessary (casting magic jar is required only for the first posses-
sions). If the spirit successfully re-possesses its original body, it
once again becomes a full dracolich. If the spirit possesses a differ-
ent body, it becomes a proto-dracolich and must devour its
former body to become a full dracolich.

A symbiotic relationship exists between a dracolich and the
wizards who create it. The wizards honor and aid their dracolich,
as well as providing it with regular offerings of treasure items. In
return, the dracolich defends its wizards against enemies and
other threats, as well as assisting them in their various schemes.
Like dragons, dracoliches are loners, but they take comfort in the
knowledge that they have allies.

Dracoliches are generally found in the same habitats as the
dragons from which they were created; dracoliches created from
green dragons, for instance, are likely to be found in subtropical
and temperate forests. Though they do not live with their wiz-
ards, their lairs are never more than a few miles away. Draco-
liches prefer darkness and are usually encountered at night, in
shadowy forests, or in underground labyrinths.

Ecology: Dracoliches are never hungry, but they must eat in or-
der to refuel their breath weapons. Like dragons, dracoliches can
consume nearly anything, but prefer the food eaten by their origi-
nal forms (for instance, if a dracolich was originally a red dragon,
it prefers fresh meat), The body of a destroyed dracolich crum-
bles into a foul-smelling powder within a few hours; this powder
can be used by knowledgeable wizards as a component for creat-
ing potions of undead control and similar magical substances.
Dragon, Faerie

     

ios

go
FORGOTTEN RCALIN
——<_—_— et

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate, tropical, and
subtropical forests

Very rare

Genius (17-18)
, T,

Chaotic good

 

1-6
5 (1 when invisible)
6, FL24 (A)

DAMAGBATTACK: ‘12
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Breath weapon, spells
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Invisibility

7 Mature Adult
8 Old

11 Wyrm
12 Great Wyrm

21-22
23-24

A chaotic offshoot of the pseudodragon, the faerie dragon lives in
peaceful, tangled forests and thrives on pranks, mischief, and practi-
cal jokes.

Faerie dragons resemble miniature dragons with thin bodies, long
prehensile tails, gossamer butterfly wings, and huge smiles. Their col-
ors range through the spectrum, changing as they age from the red of
a hatchling to the black of a great wyrm (see chart). The hides of fe-
males have a golden tinge that sparkles in the sunlight; males have a
silver tinge.

All faerie dragons can communicate telepathically with one an-
other at a distance of up to two miles. They speak their own language,
along with the languages of sprites, pixies, elves, and the birds and
animals in their area.

Combat: Faerie dragons can become invisible at will, and they are
able to attack, use spells, and employ their breath weapons while in-
visible. They attack as 4-HD monsters, biting for 1-2 points of dam-
age. Most (65%) faerie dragons employ wizard spells as a wizard of
the level indicated on the accompanying chart; 35% employ priest
spells of the Animal, Plant, Elemental, and Weather Spheres. All
spells are chosen for their mischief potential. The two most common
spells of faerie dragons are water breathing and legend lore; other fa-
vored spells include ventriloquism, unseen servant, forget, sugges-
tion, distance distortion, limited wish, obscurement, animal growth,
and animate rock.

A faerie dragon usually begins its attacks by turning invisible and
using its breath weapon, a two-foot-diameter cloud of euphoria gas.

 

 

 

 

© 88% : : a3!
96% 16 4

 

A victim failing a saving throw vs. breath weapon will wander
around aimlessly in a state of bliss for the next 3d4 minutes, during
which time he is unable to attack and his Armor Class is worsened by
2. Even though he is unable to attack, the victim can keep his mind on
the situation if he succeeds in an Intelligence check (by rolling his In-
telligence score or less on 1d20) each round; if he fails an Intelligence
check, he completely loses interest in the matters at hand for the dura-
tion of the breath weapon's effect.

Faerie dragons avoid combat and never intentionally inflict dam-
age unless cornered or defending their lairs. If attacked, however,
they engage in a spirited defense, ably supported by their sprite and
pixie friends until the opponents are driven away.

Habitat/Society: Faerie dragons make their lairs in the hollows of
high trees, preferably near a pond or stream, as they are quite fond of
swimming and diving. They often live in the company of a group of
pixies or sprites.

Faerie dragons take advantage of every opportunity to wreak mis-
chief on passers-by, frequently using forest creatures to help them in
their pranks. Though many of these pranks are spontaneous, months
of preparation can go into a single, spectacular practical joke. A tell-
tale giggle, which sounds like the tinkling of tiny silver bells, often al-
erts potential victims to the presence of invisible faerie dragons.

Ecology: Faerie dragons eat fruit, vegetables, nuts, roots, honey,
and grains. They are particularly fond of fruit pastries and have been
known to go to great lengths to get a fresh apple pie.
Oriental Dragons

 

 

 

Oriental dragons, especially of adult age and older, tend to be sol-
itary creatures. When multiple dragons are encountered, they are
usually a mated pair and young. Mated pairs are never found to-
gether when older than mature adults, and their offspring are al-
ways young adults or younger. To determine the age of the
offspring, roll 1d6: 1=egg, 2=hatchling, 3=very young,
4= young, 5= juvenile, 6= young adult.

 

The Celestial Bureaucracy

Most oriental dragons are officials in the Celestial Bureaucracy, a
governing body of powerful spirits headed by the Celestial Em-
peror. Each subspecies of oriental dragon is charged by the Celes-
tial Bureaucracy to direct a particular governmental function;
Chiang lung, for instance, are charged with guarding rivers and
lakes and dispensing rai

Every year, the oriental dragon officers journey to the Celestial
Palace to file their reports of the previous year’s activities and
events. Rewards and punishments are distributed based on the
evaluation of the reports. A corrupt or inefficient dragon may be
removed and replaced by a new appointee; an industrious dragon
may be promoted to a position of higher responsibility.

 

Hit Die and Combat Modifiers

Oriental dragons’ Hit Dice and combat modifiers vary according
to age category. Consult the individual dragon entries for their
base Hit Die information and the table below for the modifiers.
An oriental dragon saves as a fighter equal in level to the dragon's
Hit Dice. Its combat modifier applies to both attack and damage
rolls for each physical attack; it does not apply to breath weapon
or other special attacks. (For example, a li lung has 13 Hit Dice as
abase. A very young li lung subtracts 4 dice, which gives it a total
of 9 Hit Dice. It saves as a 9th-level fighter and has a +1 bonus
applied to its physical attacks.

Oriental Dragon Attacks and Defenses

Like other dragons, oriental dragons have a claw/claw/bite at-
tack. Though claws can attack creatures to the dragons’ front and
sides, only certain oriental dragons have necks long enough to en-
able them to attack opponents to their sides as well as to their
front. Young adult and older oriental dragons able to fly can at-
tempt snatch attacks like other dragons (including a 50% chance
that the snatched victim's arms are pinned, automatic claw dam-
age each round if the victim is squeezed, and a transfer to the
dragon’s mouth if an attack roll is successful, which then inflicts
automatic bite damage each round). As indicated in the individ-
ual listings, only certain oriental dragons can attack with kicks,
wing buffets, or tail slaps.

An oriental dragon's Armor Class improves as it ages, as does
its ability to resist magic. Old and older oriental dragons are im-
mune to normal missiles because of their tough hides. As with
other dragons, the skin of an oriental dragon can be made into
dragon armor that grants its wearer an Armor Class of 4 worse

than the Armor Class of the dragon it was taken from (though the
Armor Class can be no worse than 8).

Like other dragons, young adult and older oriental dragons ra-
diate an aura that may cause opponents to panic. Humans and
demihumans with fewer than 1 Hit Die and non-aggressive crea-
tures with fewer Hit Dice than the dragon automatically flee in
panic for 4d6 minutes at the sight of the dragon. Other opponents
may be panicked and forced to fight with a 2 penalty to both
their attack and damage rolls if they are within the radius of an
oriental dragon’s fear aura and fail their saving throws vs. petrifi-
cation. Victims adjust their saving throws by the modifier indi-
cated on the following table; the table also lists the fear aura
radius for each oriental dragon age category.

Diving oriental dragons can strike with their claws with a +1
bonus to the attack roll. When engaging other flying opponents,
oriental dragons can either claw or bite, but not both.

Certain subspecies have the ability of scaly command that
gives them control over varying numbers of scaly creatures with
animal intelligence or less (primarily reptiles and fishes) living in
the water within a half-mile radius. This control lasts for 2d6
turns and cannot be dispelled. No saving throws are allowed.
Creatures under the scaly command of one dragon cannot fall un-
der the control of another. Additionally, scaly creatures will
never voluntarily attack an oriental dragon with the scaly com-
mand ability.

Other subspecies have the ability to surround themselves in an
aura of water fire whenever they are under or touching water.
Water fire appears as ghostly, flickering multi-colored flames and
causes a variable amount of damage to anyone who touches it.
All oriental dragons are themselves immune to water fire. It may
be dispelled by the creator at any time; otherwise, it disappears
for 2d6 turns if contacted by real or magical fire, and cannot be
recreated until the end of that period.

Special Abilities

Oriental dragons do not have the spellcasting, abilities of other
dragons, and not all of them have breath weapons. They do,
however, have several special abilities of their own. All, for in-
stance, have continual ESP (as the spell) at a range in feet equal to
five times their age level. Oriental dragons do not require sleep.
All can become invisible and visible at will, though they always
become visible when attacking. All except yu lung can poly-
morph into human form and back at will.

Oriental dragons can detect invisible objects and creatures (in-
cluding those hidden in darkness or fog) within a ten-foot radius
per age category. They also have a natural clairaudience ability
with respect to their lairs; the range is 20 feet per age category.
The dragon must concentrate on a specific section of its lair or the
surrounding area to use this ability.

Most oriental dragons can fly because of the powers of a magi-
cal gem or pearl that is imbedded within the brain. This object
functions only for the dragon and cannot be extracted so as to
confer flight on any other creature.

 

Actual Age

     
  

7
8 Old
10 Vooeae
11 Wyrm
12 Great Wyrm

Hit Die Modifier

Fear Radius

Combat Modifier Fear Save Modifier

    

40 yards -2
45 yards -3
Chiang Lung (River Dragon)

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical, subtropical, and

temperate lakes and rivers
FREQUENCY: Rare

INTELLIGENCE:
TREASURE:
ALIGNMENT:

High to genius (11-18)
Special
Lawful neutral (good)

 

NO. APPEARING: 1-2
ARMOR CLASS: 0 (base)
MOVEMENT: 12, FL18 (E), Sw 24

1-8/1-8/3-36
Snatch, tail slap, and magical
abilities

DAMAGE/ATTACK:
SPECIAL ATTACKS:

Fanatic (18)
Variable

Body Lgt. (’) Tail Lgt. (’)

7 Mature Adult
8 Old

   
   

130-144
144-158

11 Wyrm
12 Great Wyrm

119-130
130-142

Chiang lung resemble giant serpents; it is difficult to determine where
their bodies end and their tails begin. Though wingless, they are able to fly
though the power of magical blue pearls imbedded in their brains. Their
bodies are various shades of blue and green; their bellies are brilliant yel-
low. Multi-colored beards sprout beneath the chins of young adult and
older chiang lung, and pairs of long, white horns grow from their heads.
Chiang lung are often encountered in human form, which they seem to
prefer over their natural bodies.

Chiang lung speak their own tongue, the languages of shen hung, fishes,
and the Celestial Court, and all human languages.

Combat: Chiang lung prefer to avoid combat, but they fight fiercely to
protect their domain. In combat, they charge for a claw/claw/bite attack,
maneuvering into position for a tail slap at the earliest opportunity (only
adult or older chiang lung can attack with a tail slap, inflicting damage
‘equal to two claw attacks and affecting as many opponents as the dragon's
age category; those within the sweep of the dragon’s tail must roll success-
ful saving throws vs. petrification or be stunned for 1d4 +1 rounds).

If in human form, a chiang lung is automatically armed with a sword
+5; this blade is so massive that others must make a successful bend bars/
lift gates roll to use it.

Special Abilities: From birth, chiang lung can breathe both water and air
and can polymorph three times per day to any form desired. They can ex-
pel storm clouds at will, enabling them to cause rain whenever and wher-
ever they choose. They can also lower water in a one-square-mile radius
per age level at will. Any person in physical contact with a chiang lung
can breath and move underwater as if he were on dry land.

As they age, chiang lung gain the following additional abilities (older
chiang lung have all the abilities listed in the younger categories):

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

-7 65% Fx3

17,000
-8 70% x3 18,000
Age Abilities
Young Bless and curse, each once per round

Juvenile Omen and fate, each once per round

Adult Dispel evil, control weather, and remove curse, each
‘once per round

Mature adult Major creation and reward, each once per day

Great wyrm Tsunami once per day”

*Only when so ordered by the Celestial Bureaucracy; disobedience is
punishable by death.

Habitat/Society: The Celestial Bureaucracy assigns a chiang lung to
every river and lake. Their lairs are magical palaces located beneath the
water's surface; regardless of the size of the river or lake, the palace is al-
ways opulent and immense. Unless freely given by the chiang lung, items
taken from the palace become worthless upon reaching the surface.
Chiang lung sometimes entertain virtuous scholars and men of learning,
and art on lavishly decorated boats, posing as wealthy nobles or govern-
ment officials.

The daughters of chiang lung are often attracted to handsome human
males, occasionally resulting in secret love affairs and marriage. Such liai-
sons usually end sadly when the daughters return home, never to see their
husbands or lovers again. Children born of such a marriage are spirit folk.

Ecology: Chiang lung can eat any type of mineral or gem, but they also
havea taste for fish and sheep. They are always attended by lesser nature
spirits (who also assume human form) in their palaces and have 1d6 shen
lung acting as bodyguards and aides. There is a 75% chance of having 2d4
offspring in their palaces. When encountered outside their lair, there is a
75% chance they are accompanied by 1d4 lesser nature spirits and a 40%
chance that 1-2 shen lung are present.
Li Lung (Earth Dragon)

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical, subtropical, and
temperate subterranean

FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary or clan

ACTIVITY CYCLE; Any

INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)

TREASURE: Special

ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARIN! 1-4

ARMOR CLAS: 2 (base)

MOVEMENT: 12, Fl 30 (E), Sw 9, Bro

HIT DICE: 13 (base)

THACO: 7

NO, OF ATTACKS: 3+special
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-8/2-8/2-20

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Snatch, wing buffet, kick, and

magical abilities

SPECIAL DEFENSES: ia

‘MAGIC RESISTANCE: Variable

SIZE: G (30! base) z
MORALE: Champion (16)

XP VALUE: Variable

Age Category Body Lgt. (’) AC
1 = S
2 Very Young 11-20 4
3 Young 20-29 3
4 Juvenile 29-38 2
5 Young Adult 38-48 1
6 Adult 48-58 oO
7 Mature Adult 58-69 “1
8 Old 69-79 -2
9 Very Old 79-89 3)

10 Venerable 89-100 —4
11 Wyrm 100-110 “5
12 Great Wyrm 110-120 -6

A li lung has a lion's body and tail and a human face. Small black
pupils are centered in its golden eyes, and colorful quills resembling the
feathers of a peacock extend from its leathery wings. As a hatchling,
the li lung’s body is covered with light green scales, but as it grows, the
scales begin to darken and change into coarse fur. By the time the li
lung grows into a juvenile, the scales are completely gone and the fur
has the texture of thick wire. The fur continues to darken as it ages,
turning nearly black by the time a li lung reaches the great wyrm stage.

Li lung speak their own tongue, the language of the Celestial Court,
and all human languages

Combat: Li lung prefer to avoid combat, hiding in the shadows or
burying themselves in rubble until all intruders leave. If cornered or
attacked, li lung first use their earthquake ability in an attempt to bury
their opponents. If this fails, they engage in vicious melee combat,
using claw/claw/bite attacks on opponents in front, kicking attacks on
opponents in back (kicks inflict claw damage; victims must roll their
Dexterity or less on 1d20 or be kicked back 1d6 feet +1 foot per age
category of the dragon and must also roll a successful saving throw vs.
petrification, adjusted by the dragon's combat modifier, or fall), and
wing buffets on opponents at the sides (only dragons that are young
adult or older get this attack; damage is equal to a claw attack, and
victims must roll their Dexterity or less on 1d20 or be knocked prone.)
Li lung roar continually while engaged in melee. Their raspy roars
sound like metal scraping against stone and are so loud that those
within 60 feet can hear nothing else.

An airborne li lung can change direction quickly by executing a
wingover maneuver, allowing it to make a turn of 120 to 240 degrees
regardless of its speed or size. A li lung cannot gain altitude during the
round when it performs a wingover, but it can dive.

 

MR Treas. Type X.P. Value
= = 975
a ie 2,000
— = 4,000
sae 12H 5,000

10% H 8,000

15% H 10,000

20% H 11,000

25% Hx2 12,000

30% Hy2 13,000

35% Hx2 14,000

40% Hx3 15,000

45% Hx3 16,000

Special Abilities: Li lung can create earthquakes once per day (as the
spell but with no chance of it being dispelled) with a width and length
(in yards) equal to 10 times their age level (for example, a young adult
li lung can create an earthquake affecting an area 50 yards by 50
yards). Li lung are never harmed by an earthquake, regardless of
whether it was created naturally or by a li lung; if an earthquake brings
down a cavern in which a li lung is living, it is only affected by the
inconvenience of having to dig itself out of the rubble

As they age, li lung gain the following additional abilities (each
useable three times per day):

Age Abilities
Juvenile Stone shape
Adult Wall of stone

Mature adult Move earth

The powerful claws of the li lung enable it to burrow through the earth
at a movement rate of 9 and through solid stone at a movement rate of
1. Though li lung can swim, they cannot breathe water.

Habita/Society: Li lung lair in caverns at the end of winding laby-
rinths deep inside the earth, the farther away from civilization, the
better. They seldom leave their lairs unless ordered to do so by the
Celestial Bureaucracy, usually to punish heretical communities with
their earthquake abilities, but sometimes to reward needy communities
by revealing treasure mines or underground springs.

Ecology: Li lung mainly subsist on earth and stone, though they are
fond of gold, silver, and other precious metals. Li lung rarely associate
with other dragons and cooperate with them only on direct orders from
the Celestial Bureaucracy.
Lung Wang (Sea Dragon)

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical, subtropical, and
temperate ocean

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ry | 7

 

Ne Solitary

 

 

‘Special

Very (11-12)

Special
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1

  

-2 (base)

    
  

+ special
1-12/1-12/3-36
Breath weapon and magical
abilities

SPECIAL ATTACKS:

SPECIAL DEFENSES:

MORALE:
XP VALUE:

 

‘Fanatic (18 base)
Variable

Age Category Body Diameter (')

6 Adult a
7 Mature Adult

8 Old

9 Very Old

10 Venerable

11 Wyrm

12 Great Wyrm

  

-10

A relative of the dragon turtle, a lung wang has a turtle’s body, a crested
neck, and a head like a shen lung, complete with long, golden whiskers. Its
shell is made of thick green scales with silver flecks. Smaller scales, lighter
green with golden flecks, cover its neck and head. Its hind legs are little more
than stumpy flippers, but its front legs are formidable weapons—each is
80% the length of its shell, ending in two razor-sharped talons.

Lung wang speak their own tongue, the languages of shen lung, fishes,
and the Celestial Court, and all human languages.

Combat: Though unable to fly and physically unable to attack with
kicks, tail slaps, or wing buffets, lung wang are nevertheless awesome op-
ponents and are especially menacing to passing ships.

If an unauthorized vessel enters the waters of a lung wang, it surfaces
beneath the vessel and attempts to capsize it. The chance of capsizi
ship is equal to the percentage ratio of the ship's size to the lung wang’s size
(divide the lung wang's size by the ship's size and multiply the result by
100; for instance, if a 20-foot lung wang attempts to capsize an 80-foot
ship, it has a 25% chance of success). This chance never exceeds 95%;
therefore, a lung wang always has a 95% chance of capsizing a ship the
same size as itself or smaller.

Once a ship is capsized, the lung wang attacks with its breath weapon
and attempts claw /claw/bite attacks on all victims it can reach, If the vic-
tims are sufficiently deferential to the lung wang and offer it a sizeable
treasure (usually the ship's entire hoard), the lung wang may show mercy;
otherwise, it will attempt to slaughter all of the ship’s passengers as pun-
ishment for entering its waters uninvited. Lung wang are equally merci-
less to underwater intruders, attacking them in a similar fashion.

 

Breath Weapon and Special Abilities: A lung wang’s breath weapon is a
cone of steam 100 feet long, five feet wide at the dragon's mouth, and 50

30% HRx2
Be He
1id8 +11 45% HRx3

12d8 +12 50%

 

 
 
    
   
       
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
      
 
   

 

 

 

  

“Hx2

      

HRx3, 18,000
feet wide at the base. Damage caused by the breath weapon varies with
the dragons age (see table). Victims caught in the blast get to roll a saving
throw vs. breath weapon for half damage. The breath weapon is as effec-
tive underwater as it is in the open air and can be used three times per day.
From birth, lung wang can breath both water and air. They have the
scaly command power over 4d10 creatures times the age category of the
dragon (a young lung wang, for instance, has the scaly command power
over 4d10 x 3 creatures). Lung wang are also immune to all heat and fire
attacks, magical and otherwise.
As they age, lung wang gain the following additional abilities (each use-
able once per day):

Age Ability

Adult Wall of fog (obscures vision in a radius equal to 50
feet multiplied by the dragon's age category

Old Suggestion

Habitat Society: As rulers of the sea, lung wang demand tribute from

every passing ship. Regular travelers often work out an arrangement,
dumping a pre-determined amount of treasure overboard at a given spot
to placate the lung wang.

Ecology: _ Unlike other oriental dragons, lung wang are basically herbiv-
orous and prefer to eat algae and seaweed. They will, however, eat fish
and minerals and have been known to consume entire ships. Lung wang
maintain cordial relationships with other oriental dragons, particularly
shen lung. They are friendly with sharks, whales, and other ocean deni-
zens on whom they rely for information. They do not get along with tun
mi lung (typhoon dragons).
Pan Lung (Coiled Dragon)

Tropical, subtropical, and
temperate swamp and jungle
Rare

High (13-14)
Special
Chaotic neutral

 

1-4
0 (base)
12, F118 (E), Sw 1

1-6/1-6/2-16
Snatch, tail slap, constriction
and magical abilities

DAMAGE/ATTACK:
SPECIAL ATTACKS:

Fanatic (17)
Variable

"3 Young,
Juvenile

7 Mature Adult
8 Old

     

11 Wyrm
12 Great Wyrm

126-139
139-142

118-129
129-141

Pan lung are a thinner and longer variety of shen lung. A hatchling has
gray scales at birth, which change color as the dragon grows. Pan lung can
be found in a number of brilliant hues, with various shades of red, orange,
and green among the most common. A multi-colored mane surrounds its
neck, and dark whiskers grow from its snout. Pan lung scales are natu-
rally oily, which makes them gleam in the sunlight. Though wingless, pan
lung have magical blood-red pearls imbedded in their brains that give
them the ability to fly.

Pan lung speak their own tongue, which they share with the shen lung.
They also speak the languages of fishes, reptiles, and the Celestial Court,
and all human languages.

‘Combat: Pan lung prefer to appraise their adversaries before attacking,
usually by casting ventriloquism or phantasmal force spells to distract
them or by ordering minions to engage them in combat. Once the pan
lung have evaluated their enemies’ performance, they attack savagely, us-
ing claw/claw/bite attacks along with tail slaps (only adult or older pan
lung can attack with a tail slap, inflicting damage equal to two claw at-
tacks and affecting as many opponents as the dragon's age category; those
within the sweep of the dragon’s tail must roll successful saving throws vs.
petrification or be stunned for 1d4 +1 rounds).

Instead of a tail slap, a pan lung that is adult or older can encoil a victim
in its tail, automatically inflicting 2d6 points of constriction damage per
round (there is a 50% chance that an encoiled victim’s arms are pinned,
making him unable to attack the dragon).

Special Abilities: From birth, pan lung can breathe both air and water and
can cast charm monster spells three times per day. Additionally, they have
the scaly command power over 1d10 creatures per age category of the
dragon (a young pan lung, for instance, has the scaly command power over

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

=F 55%

“8 60% Hx2
3410 creatures). They also can produce water fire that inflicts 1d6 points of
damage from pan lung of age hatchling through young adult, 2d6 points of
damage from pan lung of age adult through very old, and 3d6 points of
damage from pan lung of age venerable through great wyrm.

As they age, pan lung gain the following additional abilities (each usa-
ble three times per day):

Age Abilities

Young Bless or curse
Young adult Ventriloquism
Mature adult Phantasmal force

Habitat Society: A pan lung makes its lair in the crypt or temple it has
been assigned to guard by the Celestial Bureaucracy. Guardianship is
passed through successive generations; it is not unusual for a family to
maintain the same lair for tens of thousands of years.

The gods often punish unfaithful human husbands and wives by mak-
ing them minions of a pan lung. Pan lung minions do not age, and are typ-
ically condemned to serve for a term in years equal to the number of tears
they have caused their mate to shed. A pan lung's minions obey it implic-
itly, fighting to the death if so ordered. There is a 25% chance a pan lung
will have slaves (equal to half the number of creatures it can control by
scaly command).

Ecology: Pan lung prefer to eat fruits and vegetables, often maintaining
elaborate gardens that are cultivated by their minions. Generally, they are
indifferent to the affairs of other oriental dragons and cooperate with
them only if so ordered by the Celestial Bureaucracy. They particularly
resent the power and position of the t’ien lung (celestial dragons), and
they have been known to attack them in a jealous frenzy.
Shen Lung (Spirit Dragon)

CLIMATE/TERRAIN:

Tropical, subtropical, and
temperate lakes and rivers

FREQUENCY:

-LLIGENCE:
TREASURE:
ALIGNMENT:

Special
Chaotic neutral

 

NO. APPEARING: 1-4
ARMOR CLASS: -1 (base)
MOVEMENT: 12, F118 (E), Sw9

DAMAGE/ATTACK:
SPECIAL ATTACKS:

1-8/1-8/2-24/1-10
Snatch, tail slap, kick, and
magical abil

Fanatic (17)
Variable

4 Juvenile

7 Mature Adult
8 Old

115-127
127-140

125-138
138-151

11 Wyrm
12 Great Wyrm

Shen lung are slender and bright-eyed, with spiked tails, ridged backs,
and two sharp horns rising from the tops of their heads. Golden whiskers
grow from their snouts. The scales of hatchlings are dull shades of red,
blue, green, orange, or any combination of these colors; the scales
brighten into brilliant hues by the time a shen lung reaches the age of
young adult. Though wingless, shen lung can fly through the power of a
magical yellow pearl imbedded in their brains; the pearl is similar to that
of the t’ien lung.

Shen lung speak their own tongue (which they share with pan lung), the
languages of chiang lung, fishes, reptiles, and the Celestial Court, and all
human languages.

Combat: Unless the opponents are openly hostile, shen lung usually
parley before combat. If the opponents are resistant or their responses are
unsatisfactory, shen lung engage in vicious melee, augmenting their at-
tacks with water fire, assaults from the companions under their scaly
command, and, if available, ice storm. Unlike other oriental dragons,
shen lung can perform claw/claw/bite/tail attacks; the powerful spiked
tail can easily reach opponents to the dragons’ sides and front. Shen lung
can also attack with tail slaps (only adult or older shen lung can attack
with a tail slap, inflicting damage equal to two claw attacks and affecting
as many opponents as the dragon's age category; those within the sweep
of the dragon's tail must roll successful saving throws vs. petrification or
be stunned for 1d4 +1 rounds) and kicking attacks on opponents in back
(kicks inflict claw damage; victims must roll their Dexterity or less on
120 or be kicked back 1d6 feet +1 foot per age category of the dragon
and must also roll a successful saving throw vs. petrification, adjusted by
the dragon's combat modifier, or fall).

cial Abilities: From birth, shen lung can breathe both water and air.
y have the scaly command power over 2d10 creatures times the age

  

=

 

 

FORGONE Re
y ‘

 

 

 

 

     

   

   

“16,000
17,000

8 50%
~9 55% Hx3

level of the dragon (a young lung wang, for instance, has the scaly com-
mand power over 6d10 creatures). They also can produce water fire that
inflicts 2d6 points of damage from dragons of age hatchling through
young adult, 3d6 points of damage from dragons of age adult through
very old, and 4d6 points of damage from dragons of age venerable
through great wyrm. Shen lung are also immune to lightning and all forms
of poison, but suffer double damage from all fire-based attacks, magical
or otherwise. No insect, arachnid, or arthropod can approach a shen lung,
within a radius of 60 feet.
As they age, shen lung gain the following additional abilities:

Age Abilities

Young Bless and curse, each once per day
Young adult —_Ice storm three times per day
Adult Control weather three times per day

Habitat/Society: Shen lung are most commonly encountered in the com-
pany of the chiang lung they have been assigned by the Celestial Bureauc-
racy to assist and guard; 1d6 shen lung usually accompany a single chiang
lung. Shen lung lair in modest but well-kept mansions of stone at the bot-
toms of rivers and lakes, usually not far from the palaces of their chiang
lung.

Ecology; Shen lung sustain themselves on any type of precious gems, al-
though they also enjoy fish and rodents. They are intensely loyal to their
chiang lung and also maintain close relationships with nature spirits.
Most are fascinated by humans, often taking human form to mingle in hu-
man villages. Humans, in turn, view shen lung as messengers of the gods
and bringers of good fortune, constructing ornate shrines and staging
elaborate ceremonies to gain their favor.
T’ien Lung (Celestial Dragon)

 

 

 

   

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical, subtropical, and
temperate mountains

FREQUENCY: Very rare

INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (15-16)

TREASURE: Special

ALIGNMENT: Lawful neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: ~4 (base)

MOVEMENT: 9, Fl 48 (D), Sw 6

5

  

HIT DICE: 15 (base)

 

1-8/1-8/4-40
Breath weapon, snatch, tail
slap, kick, and magical abilities

DAMAGE/ATTACK:
SPECIAL ATTACKS:

‘SPECIAL DEFENSES: Variable
N RESISTANCE: —_Variable

 

 

  

  

ZE: (50! base)
MORALE: Fanatic (18)
XP VALUE: Variable
Age Category Body Lgt. (’) Tail Lgt. (’) AC
1 Hatchling La $9)
2 Very Young (9-19
3 Young 19-29
4 Juvenile 29-39
ane as
7 Mature Adult 60-71
8 Old 71-82
9 (Old iE 82-93
Vine 93-108
11 Wyrm 127-141 104-116 =T1
12 Great Wyrm 141-155 116-128 -122

A tien lung's scales are dull gold at birth, but brighten to a brilliant yellow
when it reaches the young adult age; orange and light green varieties have
also been seen. Multi-hued manes surround their necks, and similarly col-
orful whiskers branch from their snouts and rise over the tops of their
heads like antlers. Wispy golden beards dangle beneath their chins. From
the age of young adult and up, their scales give off a sweet aroma resem-
bling that of cherry blossoms. Though wingless, t'ien lung can fly through
the power of a magical yellow pearl imbedded in their brains; the pearl is
similar to that of the shen lung.

Tien lung speak their own tongue, the languages of air elementals and
the Celestial Court, and all human languages.

Combat: Whenever possible, t'ien lung attempt to warn away potential
opponents with a fiery blast from their breath weapon. If their warnings
go unheeded, they fight ferociously. T'ien lung prefer to fight from the ait,
circling their opponents and attacking with their breath weapons, then
swooping for snatch and claw/claw//bite attacks when given an opening.
Tien lung can perform tail slaps (only adult or older t'ien lung can attack
with tail slaps, inflicting damage equal to two claw attacks and affecting
as many opponents as the dragon's age category; those within the sweep
of the dragon's tail must roll successful saving throws vs. petrification or
be stunned for 1d4 +1 rounds) and can kick opponents behind them (kicks
inflict claw damage; victims must roll their Dexterity or less on 1420 or be
kicked back 1d6 feet +1 foot per age category of the dragon and must also
roll successful saving throws vs. petrification, adjusted by the dragon's
combat modifier, or fall).

Breath Weapon and Special Abilities: A tien lung's breath weapon is a
cone of fire 90 feet long, five feet wide at the dragon’s mount, and 30 feet
wide at the end. Victims within the breath weapon cone must save vs.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
  

Breath Weapon MR Treas. Type —_X.P. Value
-2d10+1 ge MTC Ze ee
~ ad10+2 Ect a
6d10+3 _ =
8d10+4 — H
1odio+s: Hea
I2di0+6 Hx2
14d10+7 Hyx2
16d10+8 HFx2
18d10+9 ies
“poaio0 Hine
22d10 +11 HFx3
24d10+12 HFx3

 

breath weapon for half damage. A t'ien lung can use its breath weapon
once every three rounds.

From birth, t'ien lung can breathe both water and air. They can cast
control weather a number of times per day equal to twice their age level.
As they age, t'ien lung gain the following additional abilities:

Age Ability

Young Pyrotechnics three times per day
Adult Suggestion three times per day
Old Fire storm once per day

Habitat Society: T’ien lung live in resplendent castles in cloud banks
and on high mountain peaks. Male t'ien lung never remain with their
mates, and females banish their offspring as soon as the reach the age of
young. Adult and older t'ien lung have a 50% chance of being accompa-
nied by 1d4 air elementals (of 8 Hit Dice) that act as their servants and
bodyguards; these elementals unquestioningly obey their masters, de-
fending them to the death if necessary.

Ecology: T'ien lung enjoy eating opals and pearls and look kindly on
any mortal who gives them such delicacies. Farmers who rely on the good
will of t'ien lung for good weather often make sizeable offerings of these
precious gems. T’ien lung are thought to be among the most favored offi-
cials of the Celestial Bureaucracy; true or not, t'ien lung do little to dis-
courage their reputation. Pan lung in particular resent the power and
position of t’ien lung and have been known to attack them in jealous fren-
zies. Though such battles can last for weeks, the powerful t'ien lung usu-
ally triumph in the end.
Tun Mi Lung (Typhoon Dragon)

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical, subtropical, and
temperate oceans
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Special
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: Special
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: 1
ARMOR CLASS: —3 (base)
MOVEMENT: 12, Fl 48 (E), Sw 12
HIT DICE: 15 (base)
THACO: 5
NO. OF ATTACKS: 3+special
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6/1-6/2-20
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Snatch, tail slaps, and magical
abilities
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Variable
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Variable
SIZE: G (60' base)
MORALE: Fanatic (17)
XP VALUE: Variable
Age Category Body Let. (’) Tail Lgt. (’)
‘I Hatchling 9-21 TAT
2 Very Young 21-33 17-28
3 Young 33-45 28-39
4 Juvenile 45-57 39-50
Young 57-70 5062
6 Adult 70-83 62-74,
7 Mature Adult 83-96 74-86
8 Old 96-110 86-98
9 Very Old 110-124 98-110
10 Venerable 124-138 110-122
11 Wyrm 138-152 122-134
12 Great Wyrm 152-167 134-146

Tun mi lung, also known as typhoon dragons, have been charged by the
Celestial Emperor to dispense destructive hurricanes and typhoons, a task
they greatly enjoy. Though tun mi lung are only supposed to cause storms
when directed to do so by the Celestial Bureaucracy, they often ignore
their orders, launching into rampages of destruction to ravage the coasts
of warmer lands out of sheer maliciousness. Such is the power of the tun
mi lung that the Celestial Emperor must send t'ien lung to rein them in.
The largest of the oriental dragons, tun mi lung have long, sinuous
bodies covered with thick scales in a variety of colors, with blue-green,
dark red, and violet among the most common, They have dark beady
eyes, stringy beards dangling from their chins, and enormous jaws lined
with hooked teeth as sharp as razors. Though wingless, tun mi lung can
fly from the power of a magical black pearl imbedded in their brains.
Tun mi lung speak their own language, the languages of all sea crea-
tures, the Sea Lords, and the Celestial Court, and all human languages.

Combat: If possible, tun mi lung will always attack with their divine
wind power, supplemented with lightning bolt spells as needed. Other-
wise, tun mi lung resort to melee combat, first casting darkness (if availa-
ble), then ripping and snapping with claw /claw /bite attacks. Tun mi lung
are physically unable to conduct effective kicking attacks, but can attack
with tail slaps (only adult or older tun mi lung can attack with tail slaps,
inflicting damage equal to two claw attacks and affecting as many oppo-
nents as the dragon's age category: those within the sweep of the dragon’s
tail must roll successful saving throws vs. petrification or be stunned for
1d4+1 rounds).

Special Abilities: From birth, tun milung can breathe both air and water
and are immune to all water-based and air-based attacks. Additionally,
they can summon a divine wind of great strength once per week. These
winds automatically capsize small boats and have a 70% chance of capsiz-

 

AC MR Treas. Type X.P. Value
° = = 2,000
aa - 4,000
72 - =_ 6,000
—3 _ V2 F 7,000
=4 25% F 10,000
aa 30% FE 11,000
-6 35% F. 12,000
“7 40% Fx2 13,000
“8 45% x2 14,000
=9 50% Fx 15,000
-10 55% Fx3 16,000
“1 60% Fx3 17,000

ing large boats, a 70% chance of snapping tree trunks, a 70% chance of
knocking man-sized victims to the ground (victims suffer 1d6 points of
damage for every 10 feet blown by the wind). Flying victims are blown
backward 50-100 feet, and all victims exposed to the winds suffer 1410
points of damage per turn. The radius of the effect (in miles) equals five
times the dragon’s age level. The duration of the effect is 6d4 hours.

As they age, tun mi lung gain the following additional powers:

Age Ability

Juvenile Darkness with a radius equal to 50 feet times the
dragon's age level, once per day

Lighting bolt 20 feet long that inflicts 6d6 points of
damage, three times per day (increasing to six times
per day for dragons of venerable age or older)

Adult

Habitat‘Society: Nothing conclusive is known of tun mi lung lairs,
though it is believed that they maintain lavish palaces on the ocean floor.
Because they are disliked by the more peaceful and cultured creatures of
the sea, their lairs presumably are located in remote areas of the ocean
Tun mi lung spend most of their time roaming up and down the sea coasts
or circling in the skies above the open ocean, usually in the centers of di-
vine winds of their own creation, which move with them as they travel.

Tun mi lung shun the company of other creatures, including other tun
mi lung. Female tun mi lung abandon their offspring as soon as they
hatch; infant mortality is high, accounting for the relative scarcity of this
subspecies

Ecology: When it comes to food, tun mi lung are the least choosy of all
oriental dragons, equally fond of fish, precious gems, and capsized ships
Oblivious to the territorial claims of other dragons, tun mi lung are partic-
ularly disliked by the seafaring lung wang.
Yu Lung (Carp Dragon)

     
   
 

  
 

ae DS ge, Sa

FORGONEN NAAN)

    

 

  

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical, subtropical, and
temperate lakes and rivers
FREQUENCY: Rare
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: Special
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 14
ARMOR CLASS: 1 (base)
MOVEMENT: 6, Sw 18
~ 10 (base)
aL ENS
3+special

      

DAMAGEATTACK:

   

1-8/1-8/2-12
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Swallow whole and magical
a _ abilities
‘SIZE: = wale ~H(18' base)
MORALE: Champion (16)
XP VALUE: Variable
Age Category Body Let. (’) Tail Lgt. (’)
1 Hatchling. ESS 1S
2 Very Young 3-10 39
3 Young 10-17 O45
4 Juvenile 17-25 15-22
5 Young Adult 22-30

Yu lung, also known as carp dragons, live in all types of fresh water
rivers and lakes. They have no positions in the Celestial Bureaucracy;
instead, they metamorphose into other subspecies upon reaching the
age of adult and are then relocated and charged with specific duties as
determined by the Celestial Emperor. Reclusive and shy, yu lung are
the smallest of the oriental dragons and the most docile.

Yu lung have dragons’ heads and the bodies and tails of giant carp.
Their scales are blue-gray with variously colored markings. They
have two arms, long wispy beards, and bright yellow eyes resembling
those of cats. They cannot fly and are able to move on land only by
dragging themselves along the ground with their claws.

Yu lung speak their own language, the languages of all fresh water
creatures, and the Celestial Court, and all human languages.

Combat: The timid yu lung shun combat. If provoked or threat-
ened, yu lung attack with their claws and bite; if their opponents
withdraw, yu lung seldom pursue. The yu lung's tail is too flaccid for
tail slap attacks, and they are physically unable to perform kicks or
snatches.

When a yu lung reaches the age of young adult, it can unhinge its
jaw like a serpent and swallow a victim whole (the victim can be no
larger than a small man). A swallowed victim suffers bite damage,
plus 1 point of damage per round thereafter from the yu lung's diges-
tive juices. The victim also has a 5% cumulative chance per round of
suffocating. (When the yu lung loses 50% of its hit points, the victim
can be freed. The swallowed victim suffers a —2 penalty to his attack
rolls when attempting to cut himself free; thrusting and stabbing at-
tacks originating from outside the yu lung have a 20% chance of strik-
ing the swallowed victim.)

Special Abilities: Unlike other oriental dragons, yu lung are unable
to polymorph or turn invisible. They can breathe only water, al-
though they are able to exist on land for up to one hour, after which
they have a 5% cumulative chance per round of suffocating. At the
age of very young they acquire the ability to cast bless and curse, each

 

 

 

 

 

AC MR X.P. Value
4 = 420

3 es 975

2 — 2,000

1 — 3,000

o 10% 7,000

once per day. Juvenile and young adult yu lung can exhale a ten-foot-
diameter cloud of gas that has the same effect as a potion of healing
(restores 2d4 +1 hit points) on all those within its area of effect; they
can breathe these clouds once per day.

Habitat/Society: Yu lung lair in small mansions made of mud and
stone located deep in the murkiest waters of the lake or river they in-
habit. Though neat and well-built, yu lung mansions are crude by ori-
ental dragon standards. They are also relatively barren, as yu lung do
not collect treasure.

When yu lung reach the age of adult, they metamorphose into an
adult of another oriental dragon subspecies, determined randomly as
follows (roll percentile dice):

Roll Result
01-30 Shen lung
31-50 Pan lung
51-65 Chiang lung
66-80 Lilung
81-90 Lung wang
91-95 Tun mi lung
96-00 Tien lung

This transformation, which occurs exactly at midnight on the drag-
on’s 101st birthday, is instantaneous and accompanied by a loud
crack of thunder, The newly transformed dragon is then relocated to
a new domain and given an assignment by the Celestial Bureaucracy
befitting its new status.

Ecology: Yu lung are scavengers, eating the organic and inorganic
matter dug from the ooze at the bottom of their lake or river. They
peacefully co-exist with all forms of aquatic life. Yu lung occasionally
befriend humans, and these friendships are notable for their longev-
ity; a yu lung's bond with a human persists even after its transforma-
tion into another subspecies.
Firenewt

 

 

 

Hot or volcanic regions
Rare
Tribal

  

Neutral evil

 

NO. APPEARING: 10-100
ARMOR CLASS: s
MOVEMENT: 9

(242

  
 
 
 
     

   
  

DAMAGE/ATTAC
SPECIAL ATTACKS:
SPECIAL DEFENSES:

By weapon
Breathe fire

 

      

~ Steady (11-12)
Normal: 175
Elite: 270
Priest: 650
Overlord: 420

XP VALUE:

Firenewts, also known as salamen, are distant relatives of lizard
men. They are cruel marauders that roam hot regions.

The firenewt's dry skin is a mottled sepia color, darkest along
the spine and fading to near-white on the belly. The smooth flesh
and features resemble those of an eel. The eyes are deep crimson.
Females are slightly shorter (5*/2’ tall) and are a duller brown.
The young are light in color but darken as they mature.

They speak their own language and a dialect of the lizard man
tongue. Priests, elite warriors, and overlords may speak Com-
mon.

Combat: Firenewt warriors (the most common variety) are typ-
ically armored in chain mail and carry one or two weapons—pike
and sword (45%), sword only (25%), pike and hand-axe (20%),
or battle axe (10%). For every ten warriors encountered, there is
one elite warrior with 3 +3 HD and AC 3 (chain mail plus Dexter-
ity bonus). Elite warriors carry battle-axes.

For every 30 warriors encountered, there is a priest with 3+3
HD, ACS, and the following spells, usable once each day: animal
friendship, faerie fire, predict weather, produce flame, heat
metal, and pyrotechnics. Priests carry maces.

All firenewts have a limited breath weapon. Once per turn they
can breathe fire on a foe directly in front of them. This flame has a
five-foot range and inflicts 1d6é points of damage; a successful
saving throw reduces the damage by half.

Firenewts are highly resistant to fire-based attacks and save
with +3 bonuses against these. In addition, all fire-based attacks
that do affect them are reduced by 1 hit point of damage per die of
the attack. Conversely, firenewts save with —3 penalties against
cold-based attacks; such damage is increased by 1 hit point per
die of the attack.

Fully 33% of firenewts encountered on the surface, 90% of elite
warriors, and all priests are mounted on giant striders. These
beasts are highly trained in melee combat and fight even if the
rider dismounts (see the “Strider, Giant” entry).

Habitat/Society: Firenewts live in a cruel, martial society domi-
nated by the priests. When firenewts are encountered outside

   

 

 

 

their lair, they are members of a hunting or war party. They de-
light in torturing captives and roasting them alive. Intertribal re-
lations tend toward genocidal warfare, Warriors earn great honor
by destroying the hatching ground of an enemy tribe.

Firenewts are carnivorous. They eat anything they can hunt

down, even indulging in cannibalism when disposing of captives
and eggs from rival firenewt tribes. They find humanoids a deli-
cacy.
In addition to the males encountered, a firenewt lair also con-
tains females equal to 70% of the number of males, 150% young,
and 200% eggs. The eggs are hidden in a secret, well-guarded
hatching ground. The hatching ground is under the control of the
priests and guarded by 1d3 young fire lizards.

The entire lair is ruled by a firenewt overlord (4 +4 HD, AC 3)
and his retinue of four elite warriors. The overlord controls the
firenewts' treasure. Wealth gathered from vanquished foes is
brought back to the lair and added to the communal hoard. Indi-
viduals are rewarded with a few silver or gold coins, though they
have little use for them.

Firenewt females lay two to six eggs twice each year. All eggs
are collected by the priests and taken to the hatching ground. The
hatching ground is the heart of both the firenewt colony's life and
the priests’ power. Although eggs and hatchlings are supposedly
raised communally without record or regard for bloodline, in
truth the priests maintain secret records of each egg. The priests
discreetly eliminate the eggs of their enemies or of those who pos-
sess “undesirable” traits. Eggs hatch in six months. The young are
divided by sex and assigned to groups of ten that are each raised
and taught by two females. Each young firenewt is assigned to a
an adult who serves as mentor. The priests reward their allies by
secretly assigning them their actual offspring.

Ecology: The firenewts are vicious marauders that rule the in-
hospitable regions of volcanoes and unendurable heat. They are
hostile toward all outsiders, including firenewts from other
tribes. They rarely ally themselves with any but the most power-
ful of evil beings.
Firestar

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate forests, hills
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Pack

ACTIVITY CYCLE: ‘Night

DIET: Thermosynthesis
INTELLIGENCE: Highly (13-14)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1-12

ARMOR CLASS: 2

MOVEMENT: FI15 (A)

HIT DICE: 242

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: See below
DAMAGE/ATTACK: See below
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Electricity

SPECIAL DEFENSES:

Immune to magic;
heat/electrical absorption;

invisibility
MAGIC RESISTANCE: il
SIZE: _ T"-6" diameter).
MORALE: Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 2,000

Firestars, also known as moondancers, are glowing beings that
roam forests and hills and generally ignore travelers.

Firestars appear to be silent, floating, fist-sized motes of light.
They are frequently mistaken for will-o-wisps or torches.

Firestars can consciously control their illumination level, from
bright torchlight to total darkness. During a black-out they are
effectively invisible. The light fails completely when the firestar
dies.

The firestars’ language consists of intricate patterns of flashing
lights accompanied by fluctuations in their light level. They un-
derstand some humanoid gestures, movements, and languages.

Combat: A firestar never initiates combat. If attacked, it de-
fends itself with an electrical jolt similar to a miniature lightning
bolt that inflicts 2d6 points of damage with no saving throw.
These bolts have a range of 30 feet, are conducted through metal,
and can be released five times each day.

A firestar can absorb energy from normal or magical flames; it
gains as additional hit points the amount of damage the flames
would have inflicted on another creature. For example, a 12 hit-
point firestar attacked by a fireball that would normally cause 18
points of damage would gain that 18 points as additional hit
points, for a new total of 30 hit points.

A firestar can attain a maximum hit point total of four times its
original amount. These added hit points are lost after 1d4+1
hours, leaving the firestar with its original amount. Any extra hit
points are not absorbed but rather harmlessly dissipated. Fire-
stars can absorb the damage done by a flametongue sword at a
rate of 1 hit point per sword strike. Firestars are immune to elec-
trical attacks.

Firestars can drain energy from a normal campfire at a rate of
2d6 hit points per round or from torches at a rate of 1d6 hit points
per round. It can extinguish a fire by absorbing all its energy at
once, gaining 5dé hit points in the process; in order to do this, the
firestar must remain motionless and take no other actions. Fire-
stars automatically attract sparks within 20 feet; these are harm-
lessly absorbed but may betray a blacked-out firestar’s position.

Firestars are immune to most magical spells. Detection and
communication spells, magic missile, and cold-based spells have

 

 

 

normal effects on the firestar. A firestar may be hit by normal
weapons. Flaming weapons both injure and heal the firestar si-
multaneously.

If a firestar is slain, the light fades, revealing its actual body, a
two-inch-long, egg-shaped body covered in a black spider web of
nerves. The nerves intersect in a number of nodes and eyes.

Habitat/Society: The firestar is normally found floating among
the hills or trees, dancing intricate patterns with its companions.
It is acompletely alien being that shows some curiosity toward its
surroundings but otherwise ignores animals and adventurers
alike. It is attracted by artificial lights and magic, It investigates
campfires and magical lights within two miles and magic used
within 200 yards.

Most encounters with firestars occur when adventurers mis-
take them for torches or will-o-wisps. Adventurers may attack
the peaceful firestars, which then defend themselves with their
powers. Injured firestars may initiate an encounter by seeking out
and draining an adventurer’s campfire as a means of healing
themselves.

During the day, firestars rest. They land in high, inaccessible
spots, retract their glowing nerves, and spend the day absorbing
the sun’s light and heat. They may be mistaken for an exotic or or-
namented egg; adventurers may accidentally collect these “eggs”
with the idea of later reselling them. When night falls, the firestar
reveals its true self and seeks to escape.

Firestars are intelligent but reclusive. They only communicate
with creatures that employ telepathy or speak with monsters
spells. Firestars are also secretive about their life span and repro-
dactigns It is suspected that firestars reproduce asexually by bud-

ing.

Ecology: The firestar's body contains several organs that are
useful as spell components or ingredients in magical concoctions.
It contains a distinctive organ that can be used in a dancing lights
spell. Any of its organs may be used to prepare the magical inks
for affect normal fires, dancing lights, and detect magic scrolls.
These organs are worth 1-5 gp each.
Maedar

 

 

        
  
 
   
 

Maedar Glyptar
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Subterranean Any
FREQUENCY: Very rare Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary Solitary
AG “ 2

   

   

ery (11-12)
P,Q(x10),X,Y

 

      
     
  
 

TREASURE: See below

ALIGNMENT: Lawful Evil Lawful evil

NO. APPEARING: 1 1

ARMOR CLASS: 5 5

MOVEMENT: Eo. a

Bee a eee 5 :

DAMAGE/ATTACK: T hp or by ani-
mated weapon

SPECIAL ATTACKS:

SPECIAL

     

Es _ T(under 6”)
MORAL Elite (13-14) Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 975 65
Maedar

Maedar are male counterparts to medusae, though they lack the
petrifying gaze of the females.

The typical maedar is a muscular, hairless humanoid male,
usually dressed in a kilt or tunic.

Combat: Maedar attack with powerful fists that each cause 2d4
points of damage. One every three turns, the maedar can turn
stone to flesh by touch. Maedar can pass through stone at their
normal movement rate. They require one round of concentration
before this; no other activity can be undertaken that round.
Maedar struck by a phase door spell while passing through stone
are killed instantly.

Maedar are immune to petrifaction and paralyzation (includ-
ing related spells, such as hold and slow). They are immune to the
poisonous bite of a medusa’s serpentine hair. In addition, maedar
can see into and extend their stone into flesh power into the Astral
and Ethereal planes.

Habitat/Society: Maedar are the little-known male versions of
medusae. Only 1% of males born to medusae are maedar; the re-
maining 99% are normal human infants who die upon first sight
of their mothers. Because of the maedar’s rarity and natural reclu-
siveness, even most sages are unaware of their existence. Maedar
are rarely seen; normally they remain in the lair shared with their
medusae mates.

A maedar's magical power provides meat for him and his mate.
He smashes her petrified victims, then transforms the rubble to
raw meat.

The typical maedar is a monogamist who mates for life; he is
fiercely devoted to his mate and will go to any length to assist or
avenge her. A widowed maedar will pursue his mate's killers for
years.

Ecology: Maedar may cooperate with lawful evil creatures,
such as kobolds and ores, in exchange for security or reward. If
forced to aid another creature, maedar seek revenge at the first
opportunity.

 

 

 

Glyptar

Glyptars are rock crystals animated by the spirits of maedar. When
a maedar has foreknowledge of his death, he can transfer his life
force into the rocks. An extremely evil maedar retains his con-
sciousness as it drifts through the ground. When such a life force
encounters gemstones, such as feldspar or amethyst, it is trapped
within and cannot leave voluntarily. Eventually the maedar goes
mad, (Note that once a maedar is trapped within a glyptar crystal,
his life force cannot be trapped in a second crystal.)
is glyptar is removed intact from the ground, the maedar’s
irit is now able to animate the crystal and anything inorganic
attached to it. Thus if the glyptar is set in the eye of a stone statue,
the maedar’s life force animates it as a golem. This can affect a
maximum of 1,000 pounds.

Similarly, if the glyptar is set in the pommel of a sword, the
sword can be animated to strike as though it were wielded by the
living maedar. The weapon gains a +1 bonus to its attack roll,
strikes as if it were wielded by a 6th-level fighter, and gains a +2
bonus to its damage roll. Note that the glyptar’s stone to flesh
power enables the weapon to sink harmlessly into stone as the
glyptar uses its power.

The glyptar retains its other powers as well. The glyptar and its
attachments may pass through stone at will at the normal move-
ment rate. It is immune to phase door spells. Once every three
turns the glyptar can perform a stone to flesh attack against a tar-
get touched by the glyptar or its setting. Glyptars remain immune
to paralyzation and petrification attacks of all sorts.

Glyptars cannot be mentally contacted or influenced by any
mind-affecting spells. They cannot be forced to cooperate by any
means. They only cooperate when they choose. Glyptars cannot
be spoken with telepathically; however, they can cause their at-
tachment to write out messages in common, medusa, or any
other language understood by the maedar.

A glyptar can be destroyed only by shattering its stone, at
which time the maedar's spirit leaves the Prime Material plane. It
does not care whether this happens or not. A glyptar can see 90
feet on the Astral and Ethereal planes, and it can use infravision
to see 90 feet in all directions.

 
Meazel

W_REALINS

 

 

  

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Marshes, subterranean
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night
INTELLIGENCE: ‘Low (5-7)
TREASURE:

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 8

MOVEMENT: 12

 

The meazel is a vicious, malevolent creature that preys on other
subterranean dwellers or anyone else in the area.

The meazel is slightly smaller than a human. Its skin varies
from light gray to dark green. Eighty-five percent of meazels have
irregular patches of angry red color; these are the result of a non-
contagious skin disease peculiar to meazels. The patches give the
creature a leprous appearance. The eyes are jet black. The thick,
waxy hair is dark green-gray. The toes are partially webbed.
Males and females are nearly identical.

Combat: Meazels attack with their clawed hands, each hand in-
flicting 1d4 points of damage. They may use a cord to strangle a
victim seven feet tall or shorter, if they can approach from the
rear and surprise the victim. If they try this, a successful attack
roll means the cord has wrapped around the victim's throat; the
victim will die in two rounds unless the meazel relaxes its grip or
the victim breaks the cord or pulls it free of his throat. Meazels
only relax their grip if they are dead or forced to defend them-
selves from another attack.
Meazels possess the following natural thieving abilities:

PP OL F/RT MS HS DN cw RL
45% 37% 35% 33% 25% 15% 88% 20%

They rarely attack openly. They prefer to hide, sneak up from the
rear, and either strangle stragglers from behind or pick pockets in
search of gold.

Habitat/Society: Meazels are hostile hermits. They prey mainly
on orcs and kobolds, although they gladly attack anyone else
who is available. Because of this, almost any subterranean
dweller attack a meazel on sight. Meazels are carnivorous and
prefer humanoid flesh.

 

 

 

 

Meazels are rarely encountered away from their lairs. They
prefer marshes, caverns, or other cold, dark, dank places as sites
to build their squalid homes. Such homes are appallingly dirty.
Each meazel’s possessions are gathered into a pile that also serves
as the creature's bed. Rats and insects overrun the mess, polish off
the leftovers, and also serve as snacks.

Only two things can make meazels willingly congregate: the
need for cooperation against a foe, and the infrequent urge to
mate. Meazel females give birth to 1-2 whelps. The whelps are in-
dependent at three years and mature in six years. The whelps are
incapable of being tamed; even if captured at birth and raised in a
kind environment, the whelps still grow malevolent (although
probably more intelligent and cunning).

Meazels are greedy and strip a corpse of anything they finds
valuable. But they either do not understand or recognize that
magical items are valuable, hence such items are never found in
meazel hoards. On the other hand, they grab items that they
might be unable to use, such as human armor or large weapons.
The bones of past meals are stored in sacks near the meazels’ lairs.
The sacks also contain any gems that the creatures found among
their victims’ possessions. Meazels do not recognize gems and
semiprecious stones as treasure, hence they throw these away.
Ecology: Meazels prey on anything that roams the subterra-
nean realms. They are unique in that hatred of them unites virtu-
ally all other subterranean travelers.

Meazels are too mean-spirited to make reliable allies. How-
ever, they occasionally can be duped into acting as unwitting
Pawns or recruited against a common foe.
Pleistocene Animals

 

 

 

 

Titan.

 

Nil Nil Nil

 

THACO:
NO. OF ATTACK‘

SPECIAL
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

 

 

 

 

 

Axebeak

Axebeaks are flightless, carnivorous birds that stand four feet tall
at the shoulder. Axebeak markings resemble those of an ostrich.
The immense head and long neck are covered in short white
feathers. The body is covered in dense black feathers with a white
underbelly and tail. The legs are covered in yellow scales.

The axebeak has a loud, honking voice that can be heard for !/2
mile. During mating time, the males make a thrumming sound
like a bass violin. In combat, the bird hisses when not biting.

They are fast runners and aggressive hunters that pursue prey
until fed or killed. They attack by kicking (1d3 points of damage
for either foot) and biting (2d4 points).

 

Axebeaks make crude nests of stones atop rocky outcroppings.
During warm weather, there is a 25% chance that eggs or chicks
are nearby, The chicks are 10%-80% grown with a proportionate
number of Hit Dice. Immature axebeaks do not initiate combat,
although they can defend themselves by biting for 1d4 points of
damage.

Axebeak eggs and hatchlings are worth 50-80 gp. They can be
raised as guards, hunters, and mounts. The long plume feathers
of the wings and tail are worth two gp each.

Balucitherium

The balucitherium is a prehistoric, hornless ancestor of the rhi-
noceros. It is a herbivore with a thick, grey-brown hide. The
adult stands 15-18 feet at the shoulder and may measure up to 25-
28 feet from nose to rump. The four-foot-long head swings on a
thick, six-foot-long neck. The adult may weigh up to 30,000
pounds. It has poor eyesight but keen senses of hearing and smell.

The animal is very defensive. It tends to attack any animal it
detects nearby. The beast attacks by trampling a foe with its front
feet. Either hoof does 5d4 points of crushing damage.

Balucitheria are normally solitary creatures. If two are encoun-
tered, they are a mated pair. A third balucitherium is their calf.
Rolla percentile die and multiple that by 14 HD and 15 feet to de-
termine the calf’s hit points and size.

If magically controlled or raised from a calf, a balucitherium
can be trained to serve as a beast of burden. Its immense size and
strength enable the beast to carry up to 8,000 pounds.

The hide is well-suited for making leather armor. An adult hide
can be worth 50-100 gp.

Megatherium

The megatherium is a giant, ground-dwelling sloth about the size
of a grizzly bear. An adult may stand 20 feet tall and weigh 6,000
pounds. It is covered in long, russet hair. The beast is slow mov-
ing but more powerful than most animals that might otherwise
prey on it. Because of its slow nature, the megatherium always
strikes last in the round. Despite its awesome appearance, the me-
gatherium is primarily a peaceful herbivore grazing the wooded
plains.
Pleistocene Animals

Each forepaw has three foot-long claws. These are primarily
used to tear apart trees and shrubs for food, but they can also be
used as weapons. The megatherium rears on its hind legs, then at-
tacks with swipes that cause 2d6 points of damage from each
paw.

The female megatherium gives birth to 1-2 cubs every other
year. Cubs grow to maturity in four years and are found in 33%
of all encounters.

Phororhacos

The phororhacos is a nonflying bird with a huge head and power-
ful beak. It stands ten feet tall (six feet at the shoulder). It is cov-
ered with dark gray and brown feathers. An adult male will have
ared crest and a tuft of brilliant orange feathers on the back of its
head. The legs are light gray with black claws.

The phororhacos has a deep, braying voice. The bird will emit
a fierce battle cry when fighting or challenging another male over
territory.

Phororhacos gather in hunting and breeding packs. There is a
10% chance for either eggs or chicks in an encounter. The chicks
have 10%-80% of full growth with a proportionate number of
Hit Dice. Chicks do not attack an active foe, but they do tear into
a helpless victim in imitation of the adults.

It isa fearless killer and attacks even if it is outnumbered. It ini-
tiates an attack by jumping on its victim. When it is jumping to
attack, its claws inflict double damage (2d4/2d4). Each round
thereafter, the phororhacos kicks and claws for 1d4 points of
damage per blow. It also snaps with its beak for a 2d6 points of
damage. If the phororhacos successfully bites a target smaller
than man-sized, it picks up the victim and shakes it around before
throwing it back to the ground (1d6 points of falling damage).
Such victims are unable to take any action the following round.

Phororhacos eggs and hatchlings are worth 70-100 gp. They
can be raised as guards, hunters, and mounts.

Rhino, Wooly

The wooly rhinoceros is similar to the modern rhino except that it
is covered by a shaggy, russet coat and roams cold, temperate,
and subarctic regions. It is an aggressive, belligerent herbivore
that is very defensive about its territory.

The wooly rhino has poor eyesight but keen senses of hearing
and smell. When one detects an intruder, the wooly rhino

 

charges. The horn inflicts 2d6 points of damage, double if it
strikes while charging. Man-sized or smaller targets are also
tossed 10-20 feet by the force of the blow. The wooly rhino can
trample man-sized or smaller victims, each foreleg causing 2d4
points of damage.

A wooly rhino will charge wagons or other vehicles, thinking
them animals. Such charges deliver a crushing blow to the vehi-
cle. An enraged wooly rhino can smash a wagon apart with little
effort.

If two or three wooly rhinos are encountered, one is a female. If
four are encountered, the last one is a calf (30%-60% adult size).
Adults gain +1 bonuses to their attack rolls if the calf is threat-
ened. Wooly rhinos rarely abandon a captured or injured mate or
offspring.

An adult hide is worth 20-30 gp; the thick skin is well suited for
making armor. The horn is worth 10-20 gp to alchemists who use
it in counterfeit healing potions.

Titanothere

The titanothere, also known as the brontotherium, is a rhino-like
animal. The adult measures eight feet at the shoulder and 16 from
nose to rump and weighs up to 8,000 pounds.

It is a huge and fearless herbivore armed with a yoke-shaped
horn on its nose. The horn can be used to ram an opponent for
2d8 points of damage. Opponents of man-sized or smaller are
also tossed up to 20 feet in the air by the force of the blow. It can
trample man-sized or smaller victims with its forelegs, inflicting
2d4 points of damage with each foot.

If any creature threatens the herd, the bulls charge. If the
charge strikes home, horn and trample damage is doubled.

If more than six titanotheres are encountered, there are 1d4
calves. The calves are 10% to 80% grown. They do not attack. If
threatened, they head for their mothers and try to hide under-
neath or behind them.

The titanothere’s hide is worth 20-70 gp. It is extremely thick
and well-suited for making leather armor, especially for larger
humanoids or other armor-wearing beings.

Other Pleistocene animals detailed elsewhere in the Monstrous
Compendium include the spotted lion/sabertooth tiger (under
Cats, Great), mammoth/mastodon (Elephant), dire wolf (Wolf),
cave bear (Bear), hyenaedon (Hyena), and cavemen (Men).
Revenant

Sa

Naa
REALINS

 

 

Any
Very rare
Solitary

 
 
   
   
 

 

ALIGNMENT:

 

NO. APPEARING:
ARMOR CLASS:

 

    
     

DAMAGE/ATTAC!

 

SPECIAL ATTACK‘ Paralyzation
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC Seebelow

  
 

4,000

Revenants are vengeful spirits that have risen from the grave to
destroy their killers.

The revenant appears as a spectral, decayed version of its ap-
pearance at the time of its death. Its pallid skin is drawn tightly
over its bones. The flesh is cold and clammy. The sunken eyes are
dull and heavy-lidded but, when the revenant faces his intended
victim, the eyes blaze with unnatural intensity. The revenant
bears an aura of sadness, anger, and determination.

Combat: A revenant attacks by hooking its claw-like hands
around its victim's throat. This strangulation causes 2d8 points of
damage each round. It will not release its grip until either the re-
venant is destroyed or its victim is dead. It never uses weapons.

If the revenant stares into its victim's eyes, that person must roll
a successful saving throw vs. spell or be paralyzed with terror for
2d4 rounds. This power affects only the revenant's killer.

If a revenant is dismembered, the severed parts act indepen-
dently, as though guided by the revenant’s mind. The revenant's
willpower causes the parts to reunite. It can also regenerate 3 hit
points of damage each round, except for fire damage. It is im-
mune to acid and gas. Although a revenant’s body can be cut
apart by normal or magical weapons, the damage is temporary
and does not destroy the revenant. Only burning destroys a
revenant—the original body must be completely consumed and
reduced to ash.

Although it is undead, the revenant is motivated entirely by
self-will. Therefore, as it is not inherently evil, it is not affected by
holy water, holy/unholy symbols, or other religious parapher-
nalia. It cannot be turned by priests nor can it be raised or resur-
rected.

Habitat/Society: Under exceptional circumstances, a character
who has died a violent death may rise as a revenant from the
grave to wreak vengeance on his killer(s). In order to make this
transition, two requirements must be met. The dead character's
Constitution must be 18 and either his Wisdom or Intelligence
must be greater than 16. Also, the total of his six ability scores

 

 

 

 

 

must be 90 or more. Even if these conditions are met, there is only
a 5% chance that the dead character becomes a revenant.

If both Intelligence and Wisdom are over 16, the chance in-
creases to 10%. If Intelligence, Wisdom, and Constitution are all
18, the creature can shift at will into any freshly killed humanoid,
if the revenant rolls a successful saving throw vs. death.

If the character died a particularly violent death, it may be un-
able to reoccupy its original body. In this case, the spirit occupies
any available, freshly-dead corpse. However, the revenant's killer
and associates always see the revenant as the person they killed.

The revenant retains all the abilities it possessed in its previous
life and has at least the hit points and saving throws of an 8-Hit
Die creature. Its alignment is neutral, regardless of its alignment
in life. It can converse fluently in its original language, although
the stiffness of its vocal cords deters it from speaking except under
extreme circumstances, such as when casting a spell at its killer.

The sole purpose of the revenant's brief existence is to wreak
vengeance on its killer, together with anyone who may have
aided in the murder. It stops at nothing to achieve its purpose and
can locate its intended victim wherever he may be. Accomplices
are also tracked down if they are in the company of the killer, but
if they are elsewhere they are ignored until the killer is dealt with.
If the associates of the killer are with him in a party, they are dealt
with after the killer is dead.

The revenant's body does decay, though at a slower rate than
normal. Within three to six months, the corpse decomposes rap-
idly and the revenant's spirit returns to the plane from which it
came. When the revenant has completed its mission, the body im-
mediately disintegrates and its spirit finally rests in peace.

A revenant does not attack innocents except in self-defense. If
necessary, the revenant can use cunning to get to its prey.

Ecology: Revenants give murder victims a chance to avenge
their own murders. They pursue their goals alone without desire
or need for allies. However, if the revenant faces a powerful foe
able to destroy the revenant's new form, the revenant may decide
to use adventurers as pawns in its quest.
Rhaumbusun

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Warm, dry regions
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Mated pairs

A (CYCLE: Day ss

    
    

TREASURE:
ALIGNMENT:

0, possibly Q or R
Neutral

 

NO. APPEARING:
ARMOR CLASS:
MOVEMENT:
DAMAGE/ATTACK:
SPECIAL ATTACKS:

   

    

The rhaumbusun is a small, reptilian creature that is distantly re-
lated to the basilisk. It is a timid herbivore with a dangerous para-
lyzing gaze.

The rhaumbusun has eight legs and dorsal spikes. The male's
thick hide is covered with glittering purple scales, while the fe-
male is predominantly orange. All young are a dusty red, al-
though their coloration changes with maturity. The eyes resemble
small, clear, multifaceted gems.

The creature is not graceful. Its legs curl slightly under, giving
the beast a scuttling gait that enables anything with 60 feet to hear
its approach.

Arhaumbusun communicates with others of its kind through a
simple language of clicks and hisses. When agitated, the creature's
foot-long tail flips from side to side.

Combat: The rhaumbusun relies on its magical gaze to defend
itself. It can paralyze one victim per round at a range of 20 yards.
If the victim fails its saving throw vs. paralyzation, it is paralyzed
for 3d4 turns. The victim must make eye contact before paralyza-
tion can occur. Mirrors do not reflect the gaze but the spell gaze
reflection can turn the creature's power against itself, if the crea-
ture fails a saving throw vs. petrification. The power does not ex-
tend into the Astral or Ethereal planes.

A rhaumbusun is immune to the gaze of others of its kind, but
it is vulnerable to its own reflected gaze.

If desperate or surprised, the rhaumbusun may bite for 1d3
points of damage.

Habitat/Society: Rhaumbusuns are usually encountered in
mated pairs. They normally mate for life and fight to the death to
defend their family or lair. Solitary rhaumbusun usually have a
mate hiding nearby. A third rhaumbusun is their offspring (1d4
hp, bite for 1-2 points, victims gains a +2 bonus to saving
throw). If the offspring is attacked, the parents attack with +1
bonuses to attack and damage rolls.

 

 

 

 

 

They make their lairs in small, dark, dry caves or other secure
places. Lairs are only used as a place to rear young. There is a
60% chance the lair contains an egg or 40% that there is a young
rhaumbusun. A rhaumbusun’s location may be revealed by the
presence of paralyzed animals that wandered by.

Rhaumbusuns mate in late spring. The female lays a single egg
that hatches in 40 + 1d8 days. The offspring are weak at first, but
they attain full growth in 20 days.

The creatures decorate their lairs with stray items that have at-
tracted their attention, such as shiny objects. Sometimes this
shiny hoard includes precious metals, coins, or even cut gem-
stones.

Although rhaumbusuns are timid, they will communicate with
humanoids who use a speak with monsters spell or are actually
able to use the rhaumbusun’s rudimentary language.

Ecology: Although the rhaumbusun is a timid creature, it acts
as an accidental predator by paralyzing threatening animals and
thus allowing other creatures to feed on these victims. Small ani-
mals often make their dens near the rhaumbusun’s lair in order to
take advantage of the protection thus offered.

The hide is worth one gp per Hit Die and is used primarily for
small items or decorations. If the eyes are removed intact and pre-
served from decay, they are worth up to 200 gp each to alchemists
or wizards. Rhaumbusun eyes are used in the preparation of mag-
ical inks and potions related to paralyzation.

Rhaumbusuns may be kept as pets or guards by high-level wiz-
ards or priests. Rhaumbusuns sell for 2,000 gp per pair and eggs
for 500 gp. If mated rhaumbusuns are separated by captivity or
death, they physically deteriorate as they mourn. They lose 1 hp
each week for 1d4 weeks. Rhaumbusuns that survive the mourn-
ing period recover and eventually seek new mates.
Strider, Giant

mo

FORGONE Ne
pas

 

 

Hot, volcanic regions

Flock

Neutral evil

 

1-4

15

DAMAGE/ATTACK:
SPECIAL ATTACKS:
SPECIAL DEFENSES:

These large, featherless, flightless birds are used as mounts by
firenewts.

The giant strider is about the size of an ostrich. It has a bumpy,
dusky red hide and dully-glowing red eyes. It is often mistaken
for a lizard.

Combat: The giant strider attacks to its front with a bite that in-
flicts 1d8 points of damage. It can also attack to the rear with a
kick that causes 1d10 points of damage. It cannot use both attacks
in the same round; it generally attacks in whatever direction it
was last struck.

It can emit a small fireball from the duct that lies next to either
eye. Each fireball has a range of 20 yards and a burst radius of 10
feet. Anyone caught by the blast must roll a successful saving
throw vs. breath weapon or suffer 1d6 points of damage. The gi-
ant strider can generate one fireball per eye per hour.

Giant striders are immune to magical fire. In addition, they
gain a +2 bonus to saving throws against any magical attack. In-
tense heat and flame actually act as cure light wounds spells on gi-
ant striders. This effect can occur only once every three rounds.
Fireballs and other intense fiery attacks have this effect immedi-
ately.

Conversely, cold-based attacks inflict an additional 1d6 + 1
points of damage and water acts as a poison if they drink it. Any
cold liquid poured on their bodies does some damage, usually 1-2
points (at the discretion of the DM).

Giant striders are generally fearless and gain a +4 bonus to
their morale.

 

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Giant striders are completely adapted to life in
hot, volcanic regions. Their meager diet consists of the few ani-
mals and plants that share their hot realm. They are able to di-
rectly metabolize the heat of their surroundings, and they use this
to fuel their own bodily functions. Without this extra heat, the gi-
ant strider grows chilled and sluggish.

Their physiology is so modified that normal conditions are
dangerous to them. They are poisoned by ingested water and
harmed by cold weather or frigid attacks.

Despite their abnormal nature, giant striders’ behavior is simi-
lar to other flightless birds. Mating season occurs in the spring.
Cocks compete for mates by elaborate dances punctuated by the
explosions of fireballs. The hens lay 1d4 eggs in a simple nest,
usually a pit scratched in the ground. The chicks hatch in five to
six weeks and stand about six inches high. They grow swiftly,
adding six inches per month. They can begin to emit flame after
six months. Giant striders mature in one year.

Wild striders have a potential life span of 10-20 years, although
the struggle for survival usually shortens this. Striders domesti-
cated by firenewts are usually killed and eaten after 15 years.

Giant striders are the primary mounts of firenewts. The
firenewts may keep herds of up to 100 giant striders. Giant strid-
ers are fitted with a saddle atop the hips. The firenewts control
these mount by kicking their sides or hitting them with spears (the
giant striders’ sharp teeth would saw through any bridle).
Sull

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Group
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Carnivore i
INTELLIGENCE: Average to Highly. (ea)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 146
ARMOR CLASS: 9
MOVEMENT: FI 8 or 16 (A)
HIT DICE: 3to6
THACO: 3-4 HD: 17
$-6 HD: 15
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4 or 4-16
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Gas cloud
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Resistant to charms
SIZE: L (20! diameter) =
MORALE: Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 420/650/975/1400

Sull, also known as floaters, are living flying saucers, predators
who may also serve as aerial mounts.

The sull is a rounded saucer ten feet in diameter and one foot
thick at the rim. A dome rises three feet on the top, while a mouth
extends two feet from the bottom. The otherwise featureless body
is light blue in color. The sull has a mildly sour odor.

Combat: A sull rams into opponents with its hard, rubber-like
rim with as much force as it can manage. This attack causes 1d4
points of damage. The sull then rebounds away. If the sull is able
to drop down on top of a victim, it bites for 4d4 points of damage.
Sull do not crush with their bodies.

When engaged in combat, a sull emits gas from the orifices
spaced around the underside of the rim. This gas is a byproduct of
digestion and hangs in the air in a blinding, irritating cloud. The
sull’s opponents suffer a —4 penalty to their attack rolls if they
fail their saving throws vs. poison and the gas affects their eyes. If
they successfully save vs. poison or have magical protection for
their eyes, they receive only a —1 penalty to their attack rolls as
they contend with the swirling vapors.

Sulls support themselves by the buoyant gases within their
hump. By rapidly inhaling and exhaling, sulls can travel verti-
cally at a rate of 18 or horizontally at a rate of 6. Air currents can
alter their speed and turbulence can cause sulls to lose control.
For this reason, sulls fear aerial creatures who cause severe turbu-
lence in their wakes (wind walkers, etc.).

Habitat/Society: Sulls are nomadic creatures that silently float
along in small groups. Sulls live in the clouds most of the time.
They descend when hunger forces them to hunt on the surface.
Sulls prefer to hunt in open areas, such as fields and plains.
When a sull spots a quarry, it dives on it at a 45% angle at full
speed. Further attacks are made horizontally at ground level. If
the sull is prevented from feeding on the spot, it grabs its victim in

 

 

 

 

 

its jaws and floats away with it in search of a quieter place to feed.
A sull can carry 40 pounds of weight for each Hit Die.

Sulls are omnivorous. Prey is consumed by the great jaws that
hang underneath. They can extend a six-foot tube to suck in liq-
uids.

Sulls reproduce by budding asexually in their sixth year. The
miniature sulls (2d4) develop within the safety of the upper
hump. When they are one foot wide, they are released through
the mouth. Young sulls have 3 HD but do not attack. They trail
behind their parent and share in its meals. By their first birthday,
the sulls have grown to five feet in diameter, developed their rims,
and can now attack with either rim or bite. Each year the sulls
gain an additional Hit Die and grow another five feet. At age
four, the sulls reach their full growth of 20 feet and 6 HD.

Sulls lack visible sensory organs. However, they possess infra-
vision (60-foot range) and hearing and smell (20-foot range for
these senses), They understand common but cannot speak it.
Their own language consists of clicks and whistles. They are
quick to learn new languages; if one is serving a humanoid mas-
ter, the sull quickly masters more of that humanoid’s language
than the sull lets on, Sulls always recognize their masters’ voices
and commands.

Ecology: Sulls are very secretive, neither hostile nor friendly to
most other races. They are distrustful of humanoids, especially
spellcasters, because such people view sulls as vehicles rather
than intelligent beings. Sulls are used by birds as landing places;
this annoys the sulls as they lack the means to drive the birds off.

Sull are occasionally captured and trained to serve spellcasters
as aerial platforms. Sulls deeply resent such servitude. They co-
operate only under the threat of pain from electrical shock or
magic missiles. Sulls lack the ability to turn over in midair, thus
they are helpless to voluntarily dump any riders. They conceal
their true intelligence as they await a chance to escape.
 

 

Subterranean
Very rare

   

      

 

 

  
    
 
    

 

  

 
 

 

LIGE Exceptional (15-16) <
TREASURE: K (x2) and Q (x3)
ALIGNMENT: Neutral (good)
REACTION:

NO. APPEARING: 3-30

ARMOR CLASS: 2 and better -
MOVEMENT: Se si
HIT DICE: 346 ri
THACO: Ww ¥
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: By weapon

SPECIAL ATTACKS: _Stun darts at +2

‘SPECIAL - Save at +3, #2vs.

 

186)
Elite (13)

MORALE:
XP VALUE: 420

Far beneath the surface of the earth dwell the svirfnebli—the deep
gnomes—a race related to the the gnomes of the bright world.
Small parties of these demihumans roam here and there in under-
world mazes of small passageways, always in search of gem min-
erals. Their realm is in a region unknown, but thought to consist
of a closely-connected series of vast caverns in which thousands
of these diminutive creatures labor for their king. Only males
have ever been seen, and those only in very deep places beneath
the ground.

The svirfnebli are gnarled and muscular. Their skin color is
usually medium brown to brownish gray. Deep gnomes have
gray eyes and tend to be bald.

The svirfnebli communicate with each other by a form of racial
empathy when outside their own domains. They also have their
own dialect of gnomish that a normal gnome is 60% likely to un-
derstand. Most deep gnomes are also able to converse in the un-
derworld cant (the trade language) and speak and understand a
fair amount of kuo-toan and drow (tongues of their hated and
feared enemies who, along with the mind flayers, are the worst
threat to any deep gnome gem-gathering expedition). All these
small creatures can converse with speaking creatures from the El-
emental Plane of Earth,

Combat: Despite their metal armor and arms, these small and fast
moving creatures are able to move very quietly. They are 60%
likely to be unseen by any observer, even a kuo-toan, as deep
gnomes are able to “freeze” in place for long periods without any
hint of movement. They are surprised only on a 1 due to their
keen hearing and smelling abilities. They are likely to surprise op-
ponents 90% of the time.

All the svirfnebli have the following magical powers of illu-
sionist nature: blindness, blur, and change self. Each of these
spell-like abilities can be used once each day by any deep gnome.
All these creatures radiate non-detection identical to the spell of
the same name.

The deep gnomes wear leather jacks sewn with rings or scales
of mithral-steel alloy over fine chainmail shirts. They do not usu-
ally carry shields, as these devices would tend to hinder move-
ment through the narrow corridors favored by the svirfnebli. For

 

 

 

 

 

every level above 3rd, the typical svirfnebli’s Armor Class im-
proves by one point—i.e., a 4th level deep gnome has AC 1, a Sth
level AC 0, and a 6th level AC —1.

All deep gnomes are 20% magic resistant, gaining and extra
5% magic resistance for each level they attain above 3rd. They
are immune to illusions, phantasms, and hallucinations. Because
of their high wisdom, speed, and agility, they make all saving
throws at +3, except against poison, when their bonus is +2.

Deep gnomes are typically armed with a nonmagical +1 pick
(as horseman's pick for purposes of damage, size, etc.) and a non-
magical +1 dagger. They fight with these as fighters of the same
level.

Each individual also carries a pouch of special darts, 7-10 hand-
hurled missiles of about nine inches length. Two darts can be
thrown each round, with an attack bonus, due to dexterity, of
+2. The range of the dart is 40’ and the dart inflicts 1-3 points of
damage. It is constructed to contain a small glass bead filled with
a gas, which compacts and breaks on impact. Any creature struck
on its front parts by one of these darts must save versus poison. If
it fails, the puff of gas has reached the creature's system and the
creature will be stunned the next round and slowed for the four
rounds following that. Deep gnomes above 3rd level also carry 3-
6 special darts containing an acid that eats a three-inch hole in ar-
mor protection in 1 round, or inflicts an additional 2-8 points of
damage on non-protected targets (such as armor with holes, ring
mail, chain mail, etc.).

When being pursued by enemies, svirfnebli will typically dash
into a secret escape passage tunnelled to their size. Larger escape
routes used by the deep gnomes will be filled with covered pit
traps and rock deadfalls. A deep gnome leader is 75% likely to
carry 3-12 small rock-like crystals (d10+2), and these will be
strewn in the path of pursuing enemies if no handy escape route is
nearby. These crystals are crushed if stepped on by any creature
weighing more than 100 pounds, and each releases a cloud of poi-
sonous gas about 10’ in diameter and 15’ high. Any creature pass-
ing through the cloud must save versus poison or lose
consciousness for 1-12 turns. The gas cloud dissipates in 2
rounds.
Svirfneblin (Deep Gnome)

ALINS

 

 

Habitat/Society: Deep gnomes have 120’ infravision. The have
the normal gnomish powers:

Detect slope in passage 1-5 on 1d6
Detect unsafe walls, ceilings, or floors 1-7 on 1d10
Determine approx. depth underground 1-4 on 1d6
Determine approx. direction underground 1-3 on 1d6

All males of the race are doughty fighters. For every four svirf-
nebli encountered, there will will be an additional leader-type
with Hit Dice 4+7. If more than twenty normal deep gnomes are
encountered there will be an additional 6th level fighter (Hit Dice
6 +9)—a burrow warden—with two Sth level assistants (Hit Dice
5 +8). It is 25% probable that a 6th level deep gnome will have il-
lusionist abilities of Sth, 6th, or 7th abilities. Note that a deep
gnome of 6th level, if not an illusionist, is 50% likely to be able to
summon an earth elemental. The type of earth elemental that can
be summoned is found on the special table, and the summoning
can be attempted only once per day. Deep gnome clerics might
reach 9th level, though levels 5-7 are most common. Priest spell
sphere include the following: Charm, Divination, Elemental
(earth only), Healing, Necromantic (minor access), and Protec-

tion. The ability to summon creatures of the Elemental Plane of
Earth once per day (as per the table) is a granted ability for deep
gnome clerics at 7th level, and deep gnome clerics have no ability
to turn undead.

Deep Gnome Elemental Summoning Table

Die roll —_ Elemental
1 24 Hit Dice earth elemental (or DM's special)
2-6 16 Hit Dice earth elemental

7-10 12 Hit Dice earth elemental

11-15 8 Hit Dice earth elemental
16-18 xom
19-20 summoning fails

Ecology: Deep gnomes will usually aid any non-enemy for a fee,
and they will certainly help in fighting drow, kuo-toans, or mind
flayers, providing there is a reasonable chance of defeating these
mortal enemies. They love gems and will take great risks in order
to gain them. Creatures from the Elemental Plane of Earth are
90% unlikely to harm a deep gnome, though the gnome might
have to pay a heavy bribe in precious metals or gems to escape.
Thessalmonster

 

 

   
   

 

 

  

 

Thessalhydra Thessalmera Thessalgorgon Thessaltrice
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Damp, dark places Damp, dark places Damp, dark places Damp, dark places
FREQUENCY: Rare Very rare Very rare Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary Solitary Solitary Solitary
ACTIVITY Nocturnal ‘Nocturn Nocturnal al
Carnivore Carnivore Carnivore Carnivore
:LLIG! Low (5-7) Low (5-7) Low (5-7) Low (5-7)
TREASURE: See below An A D
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Neutral evil Neutral Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1 1 1 1
ARMOR CLASS: 0 5/2/0 2 3.
MOVEMENT: 12 12 12 12
Ar 12 10 10 8
Reha ean ea ade u B
NO. OF ATTACKS: — 1-10 See below See below See below
DAMAGEJ/ATTACK: __1-6(x8)/1-12/1-20 See below See below See below
SPECIAL ATTACKS: = Acid Breath, poison Petrif. Petrif.
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below See below See below See below
RESISTANCE: Nil Nil Nil Nil
- G H G G
Steady (11-12) Steady (11-12) Steady (11-12) Steady (11-12)
12,000 10,000 9,000 8,000
Thessalhydra

 

 

 

 

 

The thessalmonsters are a family of hybrid monsters resembling
hydras. There are four known types of thessalmonsters.

The actual derivation of the name “thessal” is unknown. Leg-
ends suggest that the name Thessal referred to a person or organi-
zation responsible for the creation of these monstrosities or the
land where they were first encountered.

The original thessalmonster is now extinct. It resembled the
thessalhydra except that it lacked the fringe of serpentine heads.
The thessalmonster was so genetically unstable that it was able to
crossbreed with other monsters, such as hydras, gorgons, chime-
rae, and even the drastically smaller cockatrice.

The thessalhydra resembles an eight-headed hydra. It has a large,
reptilian torso and tail measuring 30 feet long (eight feet tall at the
shoulder), Eight serpentine heads surround a large, circular
mouth rimmed with jagged teeth. Each serpentine head and neck
measures six feet long. At the end of the 18-foot-long tail is a pair
of sharp pincers.

Most of the shiny hide is a deep green. The undersides of the
necks, torso, and tail are ocher yellow. Patches of reddish yellow
hair cover the chest and upper forelegs. The eyes are dark red.

Combat: The thessalhydra attacks with its serpentine heads.
Each head attacks independently and bites for 1d6 points of dam-
age plus an additional 1d6 points if the victim fails a saving throw
vs. poison. The main mouth bites for 1420 points of damage plus
an additional 1d20 points if the victim fails a saving throw vs.
poison. The tail pincer can grasp an opponent, deliver 1d12
points of damage, and deposit the victim in the mouth in the same
round. Items placed in the central mouth must roll saving throws
vs. acid and crushing blows each round until destroyed or re-
moved.

Once per day, the thessalhydra can spit out a gob of acidic sa-
liva from its main mouth. This gob can cover a 12-foot-diameter
circle at a range of 30 yards. Creatures struck by the acid suffer
12d6 points of damage (half if a saving throw vs. poison is suc-
cessful).

Thessalhydrae are immune to all acids and acidic poisons.

A fringe head can suffer 12 points of damage before it is sev-
ered. Damage done to heads does not affect the overall hit points
of the monster. Severed heads are regenerated in 12 days.

Habitat/Society: Thessalhydrae prefer dark, damp settings,
such as swamps, jungles, and subterranean lairs.

Thessalhydrae do not collect treasure. Such items as they pos-
sess are the remains of former meals that have somehow survived
the chewing and acid of the monsters’ digestive tracts.
Thessalmonster

Ecology: Thessalhydrae are often confused with hydras. They
prey upon their less intelligent kin and anything else edible that
wanders by. They may take advantage of their resemblance to at-
tack would-be hydra slayers.

Eggs are worth 7,500 gp. Young are worth 12,000 gp. The
young can be chained in place to act as guardians for specific loca-
tions or set to roaming normally unused areas.

Thessalmera

The thessalmera is a hybrid of thessalhydra and chimera. It has
the scaled, lizard-like body and pincer-clawed tail of the thes-
salhydra, six to eight snake-like heads, a lion’s head in the middle
of the snake heads, and a red dragon-like head above these on the
upper back. The lion’s head is covered in reddish gold hair.
Patches of red-black hair cover the chest and upper forelegs.

Combat: The snake-like heads cause 1d6 points of damage per
bite, plus 1d6 on each hit from the monster's acidic venom (half if
a saving throw vs. poison is successful). The thessalmera cannot
spit acid.

The lion jaws bite for 344 points of damage. The pincer-like tail
inflicts 1d12 points of damage on a hit and can grasp one human-
sized or smaller opponent. Victims are held immobile and can
only escape by rolling less than their Strength on 1d20 (one at-
tempt per round).

The dragon head bites for 2d4 points of damage or breathes fire
up to six times. The flame extends in a cone five feet wide at its
mouth, widening to SO feet wide at its maximum range of 20 feet.
The flame causes 3d8 points of damage (half if saving throw vs.
breath weapon succeeds).

The serpentine heads can be severed after suffering 12 points of
damage; harming them does not diminish the monster's overall
hit points. The thessalmera is always controlled by the lion head
unless this is damaged or destroyed, in which case the dragon
head takes over. If that is destroyed, the thessalmera becomes a
semi-intelligent, frenzied killing machine, fearlessly and reck-
lessly attacking everything within reach. When it is done, it re-
tires to a cave to regrow its missing heads.

Thessalmera regenerate 2 hit points of damage every 24 hours.
They are resistant to fire (+3 bonus to saving throws vs. heat and
fire). They are immune to petrification and acid.

Habitat/Society: These fearsome creatures make their lairs in
swamps, jungles, and caverns. They can endure extreme environ-
ments with impunity.

Ecology: The cunning thessalmera is often found close to soci-
ety, where it can feed on livestock and travelers under the cover of
night. It prefers human flesh.

Eggs are worth 8,000 gp. Young are worth 12,000 gp. The
young can be chained in place to act as guardians for specific loca-
tions or set to roaming normally unused areas.

Thessalgorgon

The thessalgorgon is a hybrid of a thessalhydra and a gorgon. It
has the scaled, lizard-like body of the thessalhydra, eight snake-

 

 

 

like heads, and a bull's head in the middle of the snake heads. The
entire body is covered in thick, metallic scales that are a coppery
green in color. A thatch of green-black hair covers the top of the
bull's head, the chest, and upper forelegs.

Combat: Each head attacks independently and bites for 1d6
points of damage plus an additional 1d6 points if the victim fails a
saving throw vs. poison. The main mouth bites for 2d6 points of
damage plus an additional 2d6 points if the victim fails a saving
throw vs. poison.

Four times per day, the thessalgorgon can breathe out a cone of
petrifying gas measuring five feet at the mouth, 60 feet long, and
20 feet wide at the end. Victims who fail their saving throws vs.
petrification are immediately turned to stone.

Thessalgorgons are immune to petrification and all acids.

A fringe head can suffer 12 points of damage before it is sev-
ered. Damage done to heads does not affect the overall hit points
of the monster. Severed heads are regenerated in 12 days.

Habitat/Society: These monsters prefer caves in wilderness re-
gions.

Ecology: Eggs are worth 7,000 gp. Young are worth 10,000 gp.
The young can be chained in place to act as guardians for specific
locations or set to roaming normally unused areas.

Thessaltrice

The thessaltrice is a hybrid of a thessalhydra and a cockatrice.
The eight fringe heads of the thessaltrice resemble the head and
neck of a cockatrice. The wattle, comb, eyes, and tongue are
bright red. The green neck is covered with reddish gold feathers.
The reptilian torso and tail are deep green with a yellow under-
belly. The torso measures 12 feet long (six feet at the shoulder),
while the tail is eight feet long. Each cockatrice-like head and neck
measures six feet in length.

Combat: The thessaltrice attacks with its circle of cockatrice-
like heads. Each head can attack independently with a bite that
causes 1d6 points of damage plus an additional 1d6 points if the
victim fails a saving throw vs. poison. The central mouth inflicts
1d10 points of damage plus 1d10 if the victim fails a saving throw
vs. poison. Each head can attack independently. Fringe heads
take 8 points of damage before they are severed. Lost heads re-
generate in ten days. Damage done to heads does not injure the
body.

Each head can, once per day, petrify a victim by touch. This
aura of petrification can extend into the Astral and Ethereal
planes.

Habitat/Society: The thessaltrice prefers warmer conditions,
such as tropical swamps, jungles, and caverns.

Ecology: Thessaltrice treasure consists of the possessions of pet-
rified victims.

Eggs are worth 5,000 gp. Young are worth 10,000 gp. The
young can be chained in place to act as guardians for specific loca-
tions or set to roaming normally unused areas.
Thri-kreen (Mantis Warrior)

 

 

 

Rare

 

 

exc Ulett
4)/2-5 or by weapon

See below

Dodge missiles on 9 or better

SPECIAL ATTACKS:
SPECIAL DEFENSES:

 

  
 

   

The thri-kreen are carnivorous insect-men that roam deserts and
dry lands.

The typical thri-kreen adult resembles a human-sized praying
mantis. The exoskeleton is sandy yellow. The multi-faceted eyes
are shiny black. It is nearly impossible to differentiate males from
females. They may wear utilitarian leather harnesses that carry
their weapons and other possessions.

Combat: Thri-kreen are extremely agile. They can dodge any
missile attack on a roll of 9 or better on 1d20. They can leap 20
feet upward or 50 feet forward.

Thri-kreen use two weapons of their own design. They use a
polearm with a blade at either end. These can be used to slash for
1d6 points of damage against a man-sized or smaller target or
1d10 points of damage against a larger target. If thrown as a
spear, it causes 1d6 +2 points of damage.

They also carve small, triangular throwing wedges from crys-
talline substances. These wedges automatically return to their
thrower if they miss a target. Thri-kreen carry 1d10 of these.
They can be thrown 90 yards for 1d6 +2 points of damage.

Even if unarmed, thri-kreen are still dangerous. They can at-
tack with their four clawed arms for 1d4 points of damage apiece
and bite for 1d4 +1 points of damage. Because of the thri-kreen’s
venomous saliva, bite victims must succeed with saving throws
vs. paralyzation or be paralyzed for 2d8 rounds.

Habitat/Society: Thri-kreen are not social creatures. They live
in small hunting bands in the deep desert or savannah. They
make their lairs in small, light-less burrows devoid of luxuries.

They hunt a variety of creatures. They especially like the taste
of elves and consider such beings a delicacy.

Mating occurs in the spring. Thri-kreen females dig egg cham-
bers in the ground where they lay clutches of 10-120 eggs. The egg,
chamber is then sealed and abandoned. Eggs hatch in mid-

 

 

 

 

 

summer. Thri-kreen larvae resemble small versions of their adult
forms. They possess 1 Hit Die and attack for 1 point of damage
for each arm and bite. Extensive instincts guide the young thri-
kreen in developing hunting and tool-making skills. Unfortu-
nately such instincts do not guarantee survival; 90% of the larvae
die before adulthood. Thri-kreen gain a Hit Die each year and
reach adulthood in 6 years.

Packs are generally clutch-mates. Meetings with other thri-
kreen tend to erupt into battle. Occasionally solitary young or
the survivors of vanquished packs may join into new packs.

Humanoids find it difficult to establish relations with thri-
kreen, as thri-kreen instinctively see humanoids as food, not al-
lies or trading partners. The thri-kreen value few humanoid
goods; such treasures as they possess are kept more for decorative
or utilitarian value rather than as raw wealth. If they can be per-
suaded, thri-kreen can make valuable allies or assistants. Human-
oid realms that border thri-kreen territories sometimes make
alliances that encourage the thri-kreen to act against intruders
from a third region.

Thri-kreen require little food or water to survive. Extra meat
from their kills is dried for later consumption. They can also eat
carrion or each other if food is scarce. This cannibalism accounts
for the high attrition rate of young thri-kreen.

Ecology: The thri-kreen are the dominant nonhuman intelligent
race to live exclusively in the dry deserts and savannah plains.

Thri-kreen harness and weaponry are valued by collectors. A
spear or harness in good condition may fetch prices as high as 25
gp. The throwing wedges are worth 1d6 gp to collectors, though
they will cut an unarmed hand and are thus difficult for others to
learn to use.

Thri-kreen exoskeletons may be mounted intact as trophies or
be magically animated as a mantis-equivalent of a skeleton. The
head may be hollowed out and worn as a mask or helmet.
Thylacine

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Rocky or wooded regions
FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION:

ACTIVITY CYCLE:

TREASURE:

ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1 (see below)

ARMOR CLASS: 5

MOVEMENT: 15

HIT DICE: ate

THACO: lias min
NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 : 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4/1-4/2-

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Pounce

SPECIAL DEFENSES: +2 bonus to its surprise roll
SIZE: LO Verne

MORALE: Elite (13-14)

XP VALUE: 650

The thylacine, also known as the jumping tiger or mantiger, is a
fearless predator that possesses illusionary powers.

It is similar in size and shape to a normal tiger. The fur is a
smudgy, smoky-gray with irregular patches of varying hues. The
eyes are black. This cat possesses infravision (120-yard range). Its
acute senses of hearing and smell enable it to track with 80% effi-
ciency.

Combat: The thylacine can leap upon opponents to bite and
rend. Its claws inflict 1d4 points of damage, while the teeth tear
for 2d4 points.

The thylacine can leap 20 feet upward and S50 feet forward. If
can make a running leap of 65 feet. It suffers only 1 point of dam-
age when falling, no matter what the distance. If it has surprise
when jumping on a victim, the thylacine gains a +2 bonus to its
attack rolls with its front claws. If both front claws strike, the
beast can rake with its rear claws (1d4 points each), as well as bite
with a +4 bonus to the attack roll. Such bites inflict the maxi-
mum damage each round until the beast is dislodged or killed.
Dislodging a thylacine requires a successful bend bars/lift gates
roll. The front claws automatically inflict minimum damage each
round the beast simply holds onto its prey.

Its camouflage coat enables a motionless thylacine to escape
detection 70% of the time if it is in the woods or standing against
rocks. The thylacine is immune to charm, fear, and other mind-
controlling or influencing spells. It cannot be magically sensed or
summoned,

One out of five thylacines can cast an illusion upon itself once a
day; the illusion makes the beast appear to be human. The illu-
sion can be maintained for 1d3 rounds; it is used to elude pursuit
or approach alert prey. Viewers gain a +2 bonus to their saving
throws against this illusion.

The beast is a clever hunter. It avoids large groups of
intelligent-looking prey, preferring instead to pick off solitary be-
ings or those in small, weaker-looking groups. It can recognize
wizards and magical items, especially the dangers they represent.

 

 

 

 

 

 

It tries to destroy magical items, scrolls, and potions, as well as
cripple wizards.

Habitat/Society: The thylacine dwells in rocky areas and deep
forests. It is a solitary hunter. It does not maintain a lair, although
it may have several favored rest spots. High, rocky ledges and
small, concealed caves are its first choice; it will make do with
tangled thickets and ruins. The beast hides the remains of its
meals. Although it does not collect treasure, it sometimes uses
such items as bait to lure humanoids into a trap.

Each thylacine stalks a territory 30 miles across. It prefers a va-
riety of game, including large herbivores, small predators, and
humanoids, It stays clear of communities and roads.

Thylacines are solitary hunters. Even mating occurs only once
every 12 years. At this time, mature thylacines are driven by in-
stinct to travel to isolated forests and arctic regions. There they
form prides of 10-40 individuals. They stay together for months,
hunting en masse and howling loudly as they do so. The males
then leave the region. The pregnant females remain together. Six
months after conception, each female gives birth to one to three
cubs. The cubs remain with their mothers in the pride until they
are fully grown in three years. The pack breaks up as the young
mature and the females return to their isolation. The newly ma-
tured thylacine are left to find their own hunting ranges.

Thylacine have been known to live as long as 70 years, al-
though most die early.

Ecology: Thylacines may make alliances with other intelligent
felines or feline monsters when dealing with a common problem
or foe. They are closest in temperament to weretigers and may
share territories with such beings. They detest canine and lupine
species and monsters.

The thylacine’s coat is valued for its use in making camouflage
cloaks. It is worth 1d3 gp. The brain is a component the magical
inks used to write mind blank spells. It is worth 25-50 gp on the
open market.
Vulture

    

FORGOTTEN Re EG)

   

 

   

T
ALIG!

Condor
mountains Temperate, tropical mountains
Solitary

 

 

NO. APPEARING:
ARMOR CLASS:

THACO:
NO. OF ATTACK:

 

 

  

“SPECIAL DEFENSES:
MAGIC RESISTANCE:

   

Vultures and their kin are carrion eaters that roam the skies in
search of injured or dead creatures to feed upon.

The typical vulture measures two to three feet long from beak
to tail and has a wingspan of five to seven feet. Greasy blue-black
feathers cover the torso and wings. The pink head is bald.

Combat: Vultures are cowards that wait until an intended meal
stops moving. If six or more vultures are present, they may attack
a weakly moving victim. Vultures peck with their beaks, causing
1-2 points of damage with each bite. Their claws are used to hold
rather than attack a meal. If the victim defends himself, the vul-
tures move back out of reach but maintain their deathwatch.

During the course of a melee in vultures’ terrain, vultures ap-
pear 1d6 +6 rounds after a creature is felled. Creatures that are
unconscious and injured, dead, magically sleeping, or magically
held are considered meals. If the surviving combatants are farther
than 20 feet from the fallen creatures, the vultures alight and im-
mediately begin feeding.

 

Habitat/Society: Vultures live in flocks that roam warm, open
lands. The updraft provided by rising, warm air enables them to
remain aloft for hours, while the open landscape helps their
search for food. Vulture hens lay 1d4 + 4 eggs. These hatch in
two months. Chicks are able to fly at four months.

Because of their diet, vultures and their kin have developed a
natural resistance to disease and organic toxins. They can safely
eat decayed or diseased meat without risk of illness.

Ecology: Vultures feed on carrion and injured animals. They
soar along at great altitude, scanning the landscape with their
keen eyesight. When they spot an erratically moving, crippled, or
fallen animal, they swoop lower to determine whether the crea-
ture is sleeping, injured, or dead. If it is either of the latter cases,
the vultures land and prepare to make a meal of the creature.

 
 
  
 
 

 

Giant Vulture

Giant vultures measure three to five feet from beak to tail and
have a wingspan of ten to 12 feet. They are more fierce than their
smaller kin. When they are attacking a prospective meal, they
must be physically struck before they retreat.

The tendency of giant vultures to trail injured creatures makes
them useful as scouts. Domesticated giant vultures can be trained
to associate specific species (such as humanoids) with food, hence
the birds will tend to concentrate on locating and following such
creatures. If domesticated giant vultures are also trained to stay
in a specific region, their trainers can locate members of the in-
dicted species by following the birds' flight. Giant vultures must
be raised domestically in order to train them in this way. Giant
vulture eggs and hatchlings are worth 30-60 gp.

Condor

Condors measure three to six feet from beak to tail and have a
wingspan of 13 to 20 feet. They have black, shiny feathers. The
head may be bald or covered with black pinfeathers.

Condors are the largest of the natural aerial scavengers. They
are immense birds that prefer cliffs and mountainous regions.
They rarely land except to feed or sleep. With their great wing-
span, they can soar for hours.

Hens lay 1-2 eggs per year. Chicks mature in two years.

Condor eggs and hatchlings are worth 30-60 gp. They can be
trained to act as spotters or retrievers. Humanoids of size S or
smaller can train them to serve as aerial mounts. Condors can
carry up to 80 extra pounds, either held in their claws or riding
atop their backs.

Condor feathers are prized for their size and beauty. Pinion
feathers are worth one sp each, other wing feathers one cp each.
An intact condor is worth five to ten gp.
Vurgens

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Ocean depths
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary

 

 

ALIGNMENT: Nil
NO. APPEARING: 1
ARMOR CLASS: 4

   
 
   

 

 

NO. OF ATTACKS: ite or tail slap

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-12 or 3-12

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Swallows whole, paralyzes,
acid

MORALE
XP VALUE:

Average (8-10)
4,000 to 6,000

The vurgens, also known as the giant gulper eel, is a fierce marine
predator that roams the depths of the sea.

Its body consists of a long, sinuous torso and tail, and an over-
sized head and detachable jaw. The vurgens has a bite radius of
six feet; the mouth and stomach can expand to hold prey as large
as it is. Rows of spines extend down either side of its body from its
head to the tip of its tail. The tail is extremely strong and formed
from a pointed, tapered cluster of spines.

Most vurgens are colored mottled brown, although olive, rus-
set, white and purple specimens have been reported. The small
eyes are a flat black.

Combat: Vurgens normally prefer to strike quickly, swallow
prey whole, and move on to the next meal. The great jaws enable
the vurgens to swallow even huge prey. The large jaws of the
vurgens cause only 2d6 points of damage, as they are toothless,
bony ridges designed to clamp down on prey and hold it inside
the mouth rather than shred or chew food.

Once prey is swallowed, corrosive saliva floods the mouth.
Victims must roll successful saving throws vs. poison or be para-
lyzed by it. Digestive juices combine with the saliva to dissolve
the intended meal; victims suffer 4d4 points of damage each
round they remain within the vurgens. This occurs whether the
victim is paralyzed or not. Active prey can easily cut or eat its
way free if the victim is in good shape and can fit through be-
tween the curving ribs and jaw.

The spines are extremely sharp; anything that comes in contact
with them suffers 1d4 points of damage. The vurgens may lash
with its tail to cause 3d4 points of damage.

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Little is known about the vurgens for the sim-
ple reason that anytime someone encounters the monster, that
person is faced with a struggle that usually ends in the death of the
observer or the vurgens.

These solitary hunters endlessly cruise the ocean depths, swal-
lowing anything edible in their path. These creatures consider
vast tracts of ocean to be their territories. Rival vurgens partici-
pate in titanic battles over territory. Vurgens do not keep lairs, al-
though they may retreat to ocean-floor caves to give birth or heal
wounds. Vurgens will certainly haunt waters that have yielded
plentiful food in the past.

Vurgens spawn once every two years, producing 20-40 off-
spring. The female carries the fertilized eggs and hatchlings
within her. The hatchlings emerge when they are one foot long (1
HD, inflict 1 point of damage). Vurgens gain 1 HD each year and
mature in six years, provided they live that long.

Ecology: Vurgens are the terror of sea-dwelling races like loca-
thah. They see any creature their own size as a rival, thus they at-
tack even whales and kraken.

Humanoids are fortunate in that vurgens prefer the depths of
the sea and come near the surface only when forced to by
unguessed-at disturbances.
Web, Living

 

    

 

 

 
    

Living Memory
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Caverns, ruins Caverns, ruins
FREQUENCY: Nery rare Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Pack Solitary
INTELLIGENCE: —— Semi- Very (11-12)
TREASURE: Nil Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1
ARMOR CLASS: 2
MOVEMENT: 3 (leap 18)
HIT DICE: 6
THACO: 13
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 1
DAMAGBP/ATTACK: See below 1-6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: _ Lightning Nil

Crane Ni

S¢ ir ‘See below
MORALE: Average (9-10) Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 650 to 2,000 3000

Living webs, also known as carnivorous webs or duleep, are om-
nivores that roam caverns and ruins.

Living webs are small, amorphous creatures that resemble
thick gray sheets, filaments, and filaments of dusty cobwebs.
They lack visible sensory organs and specialized body parts.
They appear to consist of colonies of microscopic, identical cells.

Combat: The touch of a living web delivers an electrical shock.
This attack causes a minimum of 1d4 points of damage. Webs of
3-5 HD inflict 1d6 points of damage, while those of 6 HD cause
2d4 points of damage.

Living webs can fire a miniature lightning bolt (20 yard range,
3d4 points of damage) up to twice per turn. Living webs with less
than 9 hit points can fire only one lightning bolt per turn. All web
fragments have this power, thus a living web cut in two can fire
four such bolts per turn.

Living webs absorb all electrical energy, whether natural or
magical, and permanently gain 1 Hit Die for each 8 hit points of
electricity absorbed. Such energy causes the web to visibly grow.

They are unaffected by fire, water, heat, and cold attacks.
Blows from edged weapons inflict full damage to these creatures;
such blows divide them into two smaller wisps. Each has half the
parent's remaining hit points and will continue to advance on the
prey. Blunt weapons cause only half damage as the living web
stretches to absorb the damage without tearing. Note that separa-
tion occurs only as a result of an opponent's attack or an accident;
living webs cannot voluntarily divide.

Living webs attack instinctively; they are unaffected by fear,
repulsion, or similar spells.

Habitat/Society: These are nomadic omnivores that perpetually
roam subterranean and wilderness areas. They prefer locations
such as caverns and ruins, places full of normal webs that living
webs can hide among. They spend their lives in endless search of
plant life, carrion, and live prey. Ingested matter is converted into
the electrical energy they use for movement and attacks.

Despite the lack of visible sensory organs, the living web can
sense vibrations, variations in heat, and the presence of other liv-
ing webs. Such senses have a maximum range of 90 feet.

 

They seem to flow over surfaces, moving like caterpillars on
millions of tiny filaments. The filaments can fuse together into a
larger, denser mass. Living webs can climb walls and ceilings of
any material. They never slip, and they grasp a surface so
strongly that they cannot be removed by any physical or magical
attack that fails to slay them.

Though living webs move and act independently, they sense
the direction and size of other living webs within 90 feet. If a liv-
ing web detects another web with less than 9 hit points, it at-
tempts to join together with the weaker web. If successful, it adds
the hit points and Hit Dice to its own total, up toa maximum total
of 6 HD.

Ecology: _ Living webs are useful for their role in killing vermin.
They may be caught and used for guards in normally unused sec-
tion of habitats and caverns.

Memory Web

This creature is a mass of fibers resembling those created by a web
spell; it has similar but not identical attributes. It can hide by
compressing itself into a tight ball. It attacks by leaping up to 180
feet, spreading out into a circular web 20 feet in diameter. The
web does not need anchor points. Anyone caught by the memory
web has the same chance of breaking free as if escaping a normal
web. As the web constricts, enwrapped victims suffer 1d6 points
of damage per round until they escape, die, or the web is de-
stroyed. A memory web suffers only half damage from non-
magical weapons or fire.

Memories of slain victims are absorbed by the memory web. If
the web is destroyed, it will emit all the memories gained during
the previous day in the form of a telepathic shock wave. The
memories lodge into the minds of all creatures up to 200 feet from
the web and take the form of dream-like recollections. Some de-
tails will be clear, others beyond recall.
   

ES ge STS
{pA INGATENS

 

  

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: ‘Temperate plains
FREQUENCY: Very Rare
ORGANIZATION: Prides

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

TREASURE: B

ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 2-16

ARMOR CLASS: Males 6(5), females 7
MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 5+8

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2or3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4/1-4 and weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil

SPECIAL DEFENSES: ~2 initiative modifier
MAGIC RESISTANCE: ‘Nil

SIZE: : Lo)
MORALE: Steady (11-12)

XP VALUE: Normal: 270

Chief/Chieftain: 420
Witch Doctor/King: 975

Wemics are leonine counterparts to centaurs.

A wemic's body consists of a leonine body with a humanoid
torso extending from what would be a lion's neck. The typical
wemic measures ten feet from head to rump. When standing erect
in centaurian posture, the wemic stands six to seven feet tall.

Most of the body is covered in dusky golden fur. The tail is
tipped by a brush of long, black hair. Adult males also have a
mane of long black hair; the mane covers the top and back of the
head and extends to the neck and shoulders. Male cubs develop
this mane in their third year. The underbelly is covered in short,
white fur. The nose may be black or russet. The eyes are gold with
vertically slit pupils. The digits on all limbs end in claws. The
claws on the forelegs are retractable.

Wemics speak their own leonine language and a highly ac-
cented dialect of the common tongue.

Combat: Wemics use forepaws and weapons to attack. A claw
delivers a vicious swipe that inflicts 1d4 points of damage. Nor-
mally the wemic uses his forelegs to claw and employs his hands
to wield a weapon.

Wemic males carry javelins and either a stone club or short
sword, They often carry a tough leather shield (AC 5) for protec-
tion. Females are AC 7 and do not use weapons; however, they
gain a +2 bonus to attack rolls if their cubs are attacked. Cubs
under 2 years do not attack.

Wemics possess keen senses. They are masters of ambushes and
hunting strategy. If they cannot surprise an intended victim, 1-3
wemics move to outflank prey.

Wemics possess powerful leg muscles. They can leap 10 feet up-
ward or 30 feet forward.

Habitat/Society: Wemic society is a blend of leonine and ab-
original human cultures. They live in groups called prides. A typ-

 

 

 

 

 

ical pride consists of 4d4 adult males, 2d12 adult females, and
1d12 cubs.

Up to 3d10 prides often band together into a tribe that is led by
a chief. The chief has an Armor Class of 5, 6 +4 Hit Dice, and its
claws inflict 1d6 points of damage. It gains a +1 bonus to its at-
tack rolls with any weapon.

Sometimes 2dé4 tribes join together into a clan or nation. Such a
grand gathering is led by a king and 2d4 chieftains. The king has
an Armor Class of 3, 9 Hit Dice, and claws that inflict 1d8 points
of damage. It has a +2 bonus to its attack rolls with any weapon.

Some wemics are able to use magic. There is a 70% chance that
any tribe includes a witch doctor. Such wemics may attain a max-
imum level of 7th-level priest and 4th-level wizard.

Mating occurs at any time of year. The female bears a litter of
one to three cubs in ten months. The cubs are born with a camou-
flage pattern of black spots; these fade within two months.
Wemic cubs are playful and curious; they possess few instincts
and thus must learn everything. Cubs are born with 1 HD and
gain 2 HD each year. They reach maturity at age 3.

Wemics have human-level intelligence. They possess a Stone
age culture, using fire and possessing modest manufacturing skills
with which they can create stone weaponry, pottery, and orna-
ments. They can be taught more complex skills. They are excel-
lent trackers and guides. They may hire out their services in
exchange for treasure and tools, such as weapons and magical
items. They may also charge travelers a toll for safe passage
through their nation’s territory.

Ecology: Wemic cubs are worth 500 gp. They can be trained as
servants or allies.
  
  
 

 

aoe i : ee : ae

 
 
Advanced

Dungeonsj}3)ragons)

Monstrous
erate

MOR awl tag

More monsters escape from the
Realms and into your AD&D® 2nd
Edition game! Sixty-four pages
chock-full of new monsters for use
in your own campaigns and with
the FORGOTTEN REALMS™
Campaign Setting. From the

: gnomish svirfneblin to the deadly
ae dracolich; from the wemic to the
revenant; they’re all here! Battle the beholder-kin of the
North, the dinosaurs of the Jungles of Chult, and the
oriental dragons of Kara-Tur. All these creatures and more
are organized in 64 5-hole punched pages that will make a
handy appendix to your Volume One Monstrous
Compendium binder. Add them in and turn them loose on
your players!

aca : ae
POB 756 " Pike cae area eo melo)
eet fer Tega eee

VER Caney enue ety

ISIN Re tO Beko

uae
eet oor

Once ewe USA
Aa
PRODUCTS OF YOUR IMAGINATION. ai oe

$9.95 US

 
