 

 

 

 

ROR IRI
ee ee

 

The First Set of New Monsters for Your ALQADIM" Campaign!
 

TSA, Inc
POG Tab
Lake Geneva
Wi 53147

 

TSA, L te
128 Churen End, Cherry Hinton

Cambridge CHI ILE
United Kingdom
 

©1992 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Printed in the U.S.A.

TSR, Inc. TSR Ltd.
POB 756 120 Church End, Cherry Hinton
Lake Geneva, Cambridge CB1 3LB
WI 53147 USA United Kingdom

 

ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AD&D, FORGOTTEN REALMS, DRAGONLANCE and GREYHAWK are registered
trademarks owned by TSR, Inc.

AL-QADIM and the TSR logo are trademarks owned by TSR, Inc.

Random House and its affiliate companies have worldwide distribution rights in the book trade for English language products of
TSR, Inc.

Distributed to the book and hobby trade in the United Kingdom by TSR Ltd.
Distributed to the toy and hobby trade by regional distributors.

This material is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America. Any reproduction or other unauthorized use
of the material or artwork contained herein is prohibited without the express written permission of TSR, Inc.

2129 1-56076-370-1
How to Use This Book

MC13

 

 

Welcome to the thirteenth volume of the Monstrous Compen-
dium. This book details the creatures of the Burning World of
Zakhara for the AL-QADIM™ campaign. As in previous vol-
umes, all entries are in alphabetical order on removable loose-
leaf sheets. The loose-leaf sheets can be placed in a master
binder and removed as needed for easy reference during an ad-
venture,

Important Note: These monsters should not be intermingled
with the monsters from the previous volumes of the Monstrous
Compendium; keep these monsters together in a separate sec-
tion of your binder.

All monsters included here are typical for their type; likewise,
the encounter tables are guidelines for general play. Variations
of your own design are encouraged. Those DMs unfamiliar with
the Land of Fate and the concepts of the AL-QADIM game will
find a wealth of useful information in the Land of Fate Boxed Set
and the various AL-OADIM adventure modules.

CLIMATE/TERRAIN— defines where the creature is most often
found. Normally, climates include things such as arctic, subarc-
tic, temperate, and tropical, and terrain would include plain/
scrub, forest, rough/hill, mountain, swamp, and desert.
However, in the Land of Fate, some of these terrain types are
uncommon or nonexistant .

FREQUENCY — is the likelihood of encountering a creature in
an area. Very rare is a 4% chance, rare is 11%, uncommon is
20%, and common is a 65% chance. Chances can be adjusted
for special areas.

ORGANIZATION — is the general social structure the monster
adopts. “Solitary” includes small familial groups.

ACTIVITY CYCLE -— is the time of day when the monster is
most active. Those most active at night may be active at any
time in subterranean settings. Active cycle is a general guide and
exceptions are fairly common.

DIET— shows what the creature generally eats. Carnivores eat
meat, herbivores eat plants, and omnivores eat either. Scaven-
gers dine mainly on carrion.

INTELLIGENCE — is the equivalent of human “IQ.” Certain
monsters are instinctively cunning; these are noted in the mon-
ster descriptions. Ratings correspond roughly to the following
Intelligence ability scores:

0 Nonintelligent or not ratable
1 Animal intelligence

2-4 Semi-intelligent

5-7 Low intelligence

8-10 Average (human) intelligence

11-12 Very intelligent

13-14 = Highly intelligent

15-16 Exceptionally intelligent
17-18 Genius

19-20  Supra-genius

21+ Godlike intelligence

TREASURE-— refers to the treasure tables in the Dungeon Mas-
ter’s Guide. If individual treasure is indicated, each individual
may carry it (or not, at the DM's discretion). Major treasures
are usually found in the monster's lair; these are most often de-
signed and placed by the DM. Intelligent monsters will use mag-
ical items present and try to carry off their most valuable
treasures if hard pressed. If treasure is assigned randomly, roll

for each type possible: if all rolls fail, no treasure of any type is
found. Treasure should be adjusted downward if few monsters
are encountered. Large treasures are noted by a parenthetical
multiplier ( x 10, etc.)— not to be confused with treasure type X.
Do not use the tables to place dungeon treasure, as numbers en-
countered underground will be much smaller.

ALIGNMENT — shows the general behavior of the average
monster of that type. Exceptions, though uncommon, may be
encountered.

NO. APPEARING — indicates an average encounter size for a
home plane encounter. The DM should alter this to fit the cir-
cumstances as the need arises. This should not be used for
dungeon encounters.

ARMOR CLASS-— is the general protection worn by humans
and humanoids, protection due to physical structure or magical
nature, or difficulty in hitting due to speed, reflexes, etc. Hu-
mans and humanoids of roughly man-size that wear armor will
have an unarmored rating in parentheses. Listed ACs do not in-
clude any special bonuses noted in the description.

MOVEMENT — shows the relative speed rating of the creature.
Higher speeds may be possible for short periods. Human, demi-
human, and humanoid movement rates are often determined by
armor type (unarmored rates are given in parentheses). Move-
ments in different mediums are abbreviated as follows: Fl = fly-
ing, Sw = swimming, Br = burrowing, Wb = moving in a
web. Flying creatures also have a Maneuverability Class from A
to E (refer to the Aerial Combat rules in the Dungeon Master's
Guide, page 77).

HIT DICE— control the number of points of damage a creature
can withstand before being killed. Unless otherwise stated, hit
dice are 8-sided, yielding 1 to 8 cumulative hit points each. The
hit dice are rolled and the numbers shown are added to deter-
mine the monster’s hit points. Some monsters will have a hit
point spread instead of hit dice, and some will have additional
points added to their hit dice. Thus, a creature with 4 + 4 hit dice
has 4d8 +4 hit points (8-36 total). Note that creatures with +3
or more added to their hit points are considered of the next high-
er hit die for purposes of attack rolls and saving throws.

THACO —is the attack roll the monster needs to hit armor class
0. This is always a function of hit dice, with any exceptions
mentioned in the text description of the creature. Humans and
demihumans always use player character THACOs, regardless
of whether they are player characters or “monsters.” THACOs
do not include any special bonuses noted in the descriptions. Hit
probability bonuses due to Strength are listed in parentheses
with the THACO.

NO. OF ATTACKS— shows the basic attacks the monster can
make in a melee round, excluding special attacks. This number
may be modified by hits that sever members, spells such as haste
and slow, and so forth. Multiple attacks indicate several attack-
ing arms, raking paws, multiple heads, etc.

DAMAGE/ATTACK~— shows the amount of damage a given at-
tack will cause, expressed as a spread of hit points (dice roll
combinations). If the monster uses weapons, the damage done
by the typical weapon will be followed by the parenthetical note
“weapon.” Damage bonuses due to Strength are listed as a bonus
following the damage range.
How to Use This Book

SPECIAL ATTACKS — detail attack modes such as dragon
breath, magic use, etc. These are explained in the monster de-
scription.

SPECIAL DEFENSES-— are precisely that, and are detailed in
the monster description.

MAGIC RESISTANCE— is the percentage chance that magic
cast upon the creature will fail to affect it, even if other creatures
nearby are affected. If the magic penetrates this resistance, the
creature is still entitled to any normal saving throws allowed.

SIZE— is abbreviated as: “T” = tiny (2’ tall or less),

“S” = smaller than a typical human (2’ + to 4’),

“M” = man-sized (4’ + to 7’);

“L”= larger than man-sized (7’ + to 12’),

“A” = huge (12’ + to 25’), and “G” = gargantuan (25’ + ).

MORALE-— is a general rating of how likely the monster is to
persevere in the face of adversity or armed opposition. This
guideline may be adjusted for individual circumstances. Morale
ratings correspond to the following 2-20 range:

2-4 Unreliable

5-7 Unsteady
8-10 Average
11-12 Steady
13-14 Elite
15-16 Champion
17-18 Fanatic
19-20 Fearless

MC13

XP VALUE —is the number of experience points awarded for de-
feating (not necessarily killing) the monster. This value is a
guideline that may be modified by the DM for the degree of
challenge, encounter situation, and for overall campaign bal-
ance. For the creatures in this appendix, additional experience
point awards have been calculated on the basis of extraordinary
spell use, spell-like abilities, and exceptional magic resistance.

COMBAT — discusses special combat abilities, arms, armor, and
tactics.

With the combat abilities are listed any spell-like abilities pe-
culiar to the creature. Spell-like abilities are identical to the ef-
fects of the spell given. Where not stated, these spell-like
abilities are cast at 12th level of magic use. Since the spell-like
abilities of creatures are not spells, they do not require verbal,
somatic, nor material components, and do not require concen-
tration to maintain their effects, even in cases where the spell’s
description says otherwise.

HABITAT/SOCIETY— outlines the monster’s general behavior,
nature, social structure, and goals.

ECOLOGY -— describes how the monster fits into the campaign
world, gives useful products or byproducts of the creature, and
presents other miscellaneous information.

Close variations of a monster are given in a special section
after the main monster entry. These minor listings can be found
by consulting the index to find the major listing.

 

Alphabetical Index to Monstrous Compendium 13

Monster names are listed first with the entry page names given
in parentheses.

Ammut

Ashira

Asuras

Black Cloud of Vengeance
Buraq

Camel

Camel of the Pearl
Centaur, Desert

Copper Automaton
Daolani (Gen)

Debbi

Desert Camel (Camel)
Djinnling (Gen)

Dragon, Zakharan (Vishap)
Efreetikin (Gen)

Elephant Birds

Gen

Genie, Noble Djinn

Genie, Noble Efreeti
Genie, Noble Dao

Genie, Noble Marid

Genie, Tasked, Architect/Builder
Genie, Tasked, Artist
Genie, Tasked, Guardian
Genie, Tasked, Herdsman
Genie, Tasked, Slayer
Genie, Tasked, Warmonger
Genie, Tasked, Winemaker
Genie Double (Markeen)

Ghost Mount

Ghul, Great

Giant, Desert

Giant, Jungle

Giant, Reef

Hama

Heway

King of Birds (Simurgh)
Living Idol
Lycanthrope, Werehyena
Lycanthrope, Werelion
Maridan (Gen)
Markeen

Maskhi

Mason Wasp, Giant
Mountain camel (Camel),
Nasnas

Pahari

Racing camel (Camel)
Rom

Sabu Lord

Sakina

Serpent Lord

Serpent, Winged
Silats

Simurgh

Stone Maiden

Vishap

War camel (Camel)
Zaratan

Zin
Ammut

MC13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Underground
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Clan
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: A
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Evil
NO. APPEARING: 1-12

ARMOR CLASS: 3
MOVEMENT: 9, Sw 12, Br 3
HIT DICE: 6

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: lor2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-16 or 1-8/1-8
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Swallow whole, roar
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: L (12' long)
MORALE: Elite (14)
LEVEL/XP VALUE: 650

The legendary witness at the judging of the dead, the ammut
consume the damned. An ammut resembles a cross between a
crocodile, a lioness, and a hippopotamus in mannish form.
They have the tail and scaly legs of the crocodile, the tubby
belly and thick neck of a hippo, and the sleek arms and head of a
humanoid lioness. They are fat, bloated animals, and they are
completely oblivious to their surroundings when feeding on
wicked souls.

Combat: The ammut can attack either with their vicious bite for
2d8 or with two sets of raking claws for 1d8 each. If they bite,
their gaping jaws may be unhinged, allowing them to swallow
smaller than man-sized creatures on a natural roll of 20. This
process is slow and requires 1d4 rounds to complete. During this
time, the creature being swallowed is slowly forced into the am-
mut’s gullet with its jaws and hands. Creatures being swallowed
may attack to inflict double damage at a -4 penalty to hit with
small, thrusting weapons such as knives or daggers.

In addition to their physical attacks, ammut can roar deafen-
ingly once per turn. All creatures within 20' must make a saving
throw vs. poison or be deafened for 1d10 rounds. The ammut
can undertake no other action during the round it roars.

Ammut are equally at home fighting on land or in water and
suffer no penalties to attacks when underwater. Their acute
senses of smell and hearing allow them to attack normally in the
dark as well, but they must make a morale check and suffer a
- 2 attack roll penalty when exposed to sunlight or other bright
light. A continual light spell is irritating to them, but will not
force a morale check. However, they do attack at -1 to hit
when in the spell’s area of effect.

Ammut can see and attack creatures on the Ethereal Plane,
usually hama and other spirits on their way to the afterlife.
They can detect evil at will.

Habitat/Society: The ammut are a reclusive race and generally
avoid all living creatures. They settle in caverns, fissures, and
tunnels under desert oases and near underground rivers. In ad-
dition, they often congregate in or near evil cities and necropoli
where the spirits they pursue are common. They are lazy and

 

 

 

 

 

gluttonous creatures, always willing to gorge themselves. When
not feeding, they often dig tunnels, underwater grottos, and
passages into tombs and burial grounds.

Females are the hereditary rulers among the ammut, and their
word is usually obeyed, if somewhat grudgingly. Rulership is as
much a function of size and strength as wisdom and cunning;
revolts and power struggles over rich feeding grounds are com-
mon, though they are kept hidden underground. Females gener-
ally force male ammut to do most of the burrowing for new
hunting grounds and breeding sites, as they are too lazy to do it
themselves.

The roaring of the ammut can be heard for miles under-
ground, giving rise to legends of angry earth spirits and passage-
ways to the land of the dead in human settlements near the
ammut’s lairs. The ammut roar when mating or when staking
out territory as well as in combat, so their noises can be heard
even under normal circumstances. They seem to enjoy their
ability to make noise, and sometimes roar just for the joy of it.
Few underground creatures hunt the ammut, as their flesh is oily
and has the taint of decay about it.

The ammut have lived underground since ancient times and
cannot stand the sun, though they do infrequently come to the
surface by night.

Ecology: Ammut eat the spirits of the evil and the damned. The
spirit form or hama of wicked people is always either a weak
flier like a rooster or parrot or entirely unable to fly, like an emu
or a bird with clipped feathers. Ammut can eat material crea-
tures, but they gain no nourishment from them and tend to sim-
ply play with their kills, worrying at them and tossing them
back and forth until some other underground scavenger man-
ages to carry them off. However, they will kill evil men to pro-
vide themselves with food.

©1992 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Ashira

MC13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Domesticated trees
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Clan
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Daylight
DIET: Sunlight
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic Good
NO. APPEARING: 2-12

ARMOR CLASS: 7
MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 3

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6/1-6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Charm
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Meld with tree
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 10%

SIZE: M

MORALE: Average (8)
LEVEL/XP VALUE: 270

The ashira are tree spirits that live in domesticated trees such as
date and coconut palms, and banana, orange, lemon, plum, fig,
and pomegranate trees. They are a joyous and lighthearted
group of faerie creatures native to the lands of Zakhara, referred
to as “close friends” by the humans who tend their trees. They
can sometimes be heard singing and dancing when their trees are
passed at night.

An ashira has unnaturally thin limbs and wild, curly black
hair. By day they are fidgety, almost incapable of standing still,
constantly swaying in a breeze, shifting their arms and wiggling
their fingers. Their hair sometimes moves by itself, curling first
one way and then another. By night they are quieter, swaying
slowly, eyes listless. In the blooming and fruiting seasons their
dress generally improves from rags and scraps of cloth to com-
plicated woven garments of leaves, flowers, and vines.

Combat: Ashira abhor all forms of violence and always flee
from combat unless their home trees are threatened. In defense
of their orchard they can grow fierce, even bloodthirsty. Some
claim that the ashira once demanded yearly blood sacrifices to
nourish their bountiful trees, but their present peaceful nature
seems to belie this tale.

They can cast charm person or mammal at will and frequent-
ly do so to avoid combat. In general, though, they prefer to win
the trust and friendship of others without the use of magic.

Unlike dryads, ashira are not linked to a specific tree. Instead,
they are connected to a whole orchard or stand of trees under
the protection of a single caretaker. If the orchard is threatened,
all the ashira respond. If they must flee, they can enter and exit
any tree in the orchard; they are not restricted to a “home tree.”
This ability functions as either a pass plant or plant door spell,
cast at the 8th level of ability.

If trapped away from its orchard or if its fellows are threat-
ened, an ashira can strike with its thorny hands and nails for 1d6
points of damage per attack. Even so, an ashira will never deliv-
er a killing blow to a wounded or unconscious opponent, prefer-
ring to nurse him back to health and release him far away from
the orchard.

 

‘thy Z

-
Wy yy

Ye t-te”
aa

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Ashira are very clannish and cannot live alone
without becoming morose and moody. They are almost always
in contact with one another when they are met, holding hands,
weaving their curls into ragged braids, dressing one another,
massaging each other’s hurts, and dancing and singing close to-
gether. All of them make decisions together, arguing and voting
until they all agree (or until the majority manage to browbeat
the remainder into accepting a course of action).

The orchard itself is only half the domain of the ashira; they
also live in a separate faerie realm within the trees. This they
leave only on rare occasions, such as days of irresistible soft
breezes and sunshine, when no humans are in the orchard.

Ecology: The ashira can live on the sap and fruit that their or-
chard provides, but more often they simply soak up sunlight
during the day and convert the light to food by night, thus giv-
ing their orchard a faint, eerie glow from the magically stored
sunlight. This light is so dim that it can only be seen on moon-
less nights, but it adds weight to the tales of orchards haunted
by faerie folk.

The ashira are dependent on humans for care, protection, and
usually for the propagation of the trees the creatures use for
nourishment. They form close attachments to the horticulturists
they meet, often plying them with song and dance at harvest
time and even performing favors for them, such as watching
over their children and livestock. They are friendly with winged
serpents as well. They are friendly with all other creatures often
found in orchards, especially the birds, hive insects, and mon-
keys. They enjoy keeping pets, sometimes lodging them in the
branches of their trees and caring for them as a group.
Asuras

MC13

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Hierarchy
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Unsleeping
DIET: Positive material
INTELLIGENCE: Genius (17-18)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic good

 

NO. APPEARING:
ARMOR CLASS:

1(2-200 on home plane)

 

 

 

MOVEMENT: 12 Fl 33 (A)
HIT DICE: 8

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-10/1-10/1-8
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Fiery eyes
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Spell immunities
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 40%

SIZE: M

MORALE: Fearless (19)
LEVEL/XP VALUE: 7,000

These good spirits are the shining messengers of the gods, simi-
lar to the devas as well as their greatest rivals. They are lumi-
nous figures, shining beacons of good by day and night. They
often appear on the Prime Material Plane to guide oracles, mys-
tics, and the faithful. They never sleep.

Asuras are roughly human, with flat-white skin (like marble),
almost painfully sharp features, and enormous red wings of rip-
pling, roaring fire. Their hair is red, coppery or golden, and
their bright eyes shine like reddish stars. They have clawed feet
like eagles, and males often wear bronze helms decorated with a
feathered crest. Both males and females wear loose togas.

Combat: Asuras are primarily messengers and heralds, not
fighters, but the messages they are asked to deliver have often
been messages of wrath and displeasure, so their skills at com-
bat have been honed by centuries of practice. They attack with
their ruby-sharp claws for 1d10 points of damage each and with
their scimitars or great spears for 1d8 damage points. They pre-
fer to remain airborne while attacking and only rarely venture
into buildings or underground. They may split their attacks be-
tween two opponents, one engaged with their claws, the other
with their weapon.

Asuras are among the wisest creatures of the outer planes,
with a typical Wisdom of 21. This insight gives them immunity
to charm, command, fear, forget, friends, hold person, hypno-
tism, ray of enfeeblement, and scare spells, as well as complete
immunity to all illusions. Their fiery eyes allow them to gaze
with the same effect as a fire truth spell (their eyes dim when lies
are told), and their vision allows them to stare with the same
effect as true seeing three times per day. (The results of this sight
lead them to a somewhat skeptical view of Prime Material crea-
tures). They have all the spell abilities of 9th-level priests and
receive all the spell benefits of their high Wisdom.

When attacking from the air in a group of three or more, the
asuras may create a powerful burning wind with their wings.
This wind causes 2d10 damage points to evil creatures and none
to good or neutral creatures, but it only lasts for the round of
their aerial charge. On their home planes, troops of asuras gen-
erally carry fiery spears and scimitars, and hosts of them use
trumpets for signaling. The sound of these trumpets echoes for
miles and is capable of putting evil hordes to flight before a sin-
gle blow is struck.

 

 

 

 

 

When an asuras wishes to remain inconspicuous, it can poly-
morph self as often as twice per day to appear as a human or
demihuman. In this form asuras are still capable fighters, but
they rely primarily on their spell-casting abilities. They remain
attractive regardless of their apparent age or race.

Habitat/Society: On their home planes, the asuras are organized
into volunteer legions, brigades, and cohorts led by charismatic
leaders. Though all the members of such hosts are expected to
obey their leaders absolutely, they are free to leave one unit and
join another at any time. Their service is freely rendered and
freely accepted.

The leaders of a host have double Hit Dice and maximum hit
points. They have a wisdom of 22, with corresponding spell im-
munities. The general of all asuras is a radiant, handsome, and
wise figure named Absalom. His celestial legion numbers in the
thousands and operates exclusively in the outer planes. How-
ever, Absalom is merely a powerful servant of good, not a god,
and he cannot grant spells.

Asuras who are not members of a legion often wander the
world for a time, seeking to right wrongs and show others the
path of good behavior through their own example. They are al-
so frequently attracted to pious humans, and there have been
instances of children fathered from such unions. Though they
are born without their parent's fiery wings, these children often
grow up to become learned mystics and holy men or powerful
and devout warriors. Some few become holy slayers. Their eyes
always appear to be unnaturally bright; indeed, some of them
have the gift of being able to detect lies three times per day as
per the fire truth spell. (Such individuals are never PCs.)

Ecology: Asuras are creatures of the outer planes, and as such
take no direct part in the ecology of the Burning World of
Zakhara. They feed on energies from the Positive Material
Plane.

Asuras occasionally cooperate with the djinn against the
efreet, but in general they avoid such entanglements, preferring
to work on their own tasks according to their own timetables.

©1992 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Black Cloud of Vengeance MCI

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Desert
FREQUENCY: Very Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: An
DIET: Unknown
INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (15-16)
TREASURE: G
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic Evil or Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1
ARMOR CLASS: -3
MOVEMENT: Fl 24 (E)
HIT DICE: 15-20
THACO: 15 HD: 7

16-20 HD: 5
NO. OF ATTACKS: 2

DAMAGE/ATTACK:

SPECIAL ATTACKS:
SPECIAL DEFENSES:

MAGIC RESISTANCE:

15 HD: 3-30/4-40
16-17 HD:4-40/5-50
18-19 HD:5-50/6-60
20 HD: 6-60/7-70

Fiery rain, wind

+3 or better weapon to hit,
totally resistant to fire magic
30%

SIZE: G (Storm-sized)
MORALE: Fearless (19)
XP VALUE: 15 HD:15,000

16 HD:16,000
17 HD: 17,000
18 HD: 18,000
19 HD: 19,000
20 HD: 20,000

These dreadful creatures are believed to be the creations of those
who broke the Laws of the Loregiver in the early days of the
world. Although they are extraordinarily rare, no culture in the
Land of Fate is without tales of the Black Clouds, giving testa-
ment to their devastating power. Many believe that there is only
one cloud, although the learned sages maintain that there are, in
fact, several.

The Black Clouds are incredibly powerful monsoonlike be-
ings. They appear to be sentient thunderclouds, moving con-
trary to the course dictated by the wind if it suits them. Their
roiling depths do little to conceal the occasional flares of bright
red lightning; the winds that precede their coming echo with
thunder. Their winds carry particles of soot and ash, darkening
the ground and the air as they approach.

As a Black Cloud draws near, the winds increase their fury,
blowing not only ashes but also the sand that lay before and
beneath the cloud in its previous paths. The sound and fury at
this point are rivaled only by the fiercest sandstorms of the des-
ert. If a cloud approaches this closely, the best anyone can hope
for is that it will veer away from its course. Otherwise, there is
little or no hope of survival.

Combat: All know when a Black Cloud draws near, for the wind
increases its speed, blowing hot and hard. The sky darkens, and
the winds smell of fire and destruction.

When it reaches its target or when it is challenged by a fool-
hardy hero, it unleashes its full fury. (The wind and fire that
preceded its approach are dim by comparison.) The winds reach
a howling pitch, strong enough to level entire buildings. As indi-
vidual clouds grow stronger and bigger, their wind becomes ev-

a

%*
Y
g
Z
Z
Vs

vA

 

 

er fiercer, causing up to 6d10 points of damage.

More deadly than the winds are the fiery torrents that the
clouds carry. While the winds are immediately destructive, the
wind does not spread like the flames. Even after the cloud has
moved on, its fires fan up and continue to burn, whipped up and
carried by the cloud's winds. Those trapped within the blaze suf-
fer up to 7d10 points of damage, although a successful save vs.
breath weapon halves this damage.

Habitat/Society: The Black Cloud combines the elements of fire
and air to devastating effect. Their origin is unknown. They
have existed since the earliest memories of elven grandfathers.
Some claim that the clouds are the result of powerful magicks
unleashed in the early days of the world, before men knew of
the beneficence of the Loregiver. Others state that they are sent
by Fate to punish those who would dare to break her laws.

Nearly nothing is known about how the Black Clouds of
Vengeance lead their lives. Indeed, although they are known to
be sentient beings, none know (or, at least, none will say)
whether these beings are even alive. They might be the tools of
the Loregiver, punishing those who fall from the Law, or they
may simply be free spirits, moving where their whims take
them.

Ecology: The Black Clouds of Vengeance survive by acts of de-
struction. They most commonly attack cities or large desert en-
campments, leaving behind only charred husks and windblown
scraps. Some clouds are large enough to envelop entire cities,
although they never approach cities favored by the enlightened
gods (i.e., cities with mosques) or cities frequented by genies.
On the other hand, they somehow seem to know when a city is
devoid of gods or genies, and they revel in the destruction that
ensues. Perhaps the clouds fear the powers that the gods and the
genies wield. Whatever the reason, the clouds encourage pious-
ness in the people of Zakhara.
Buraq

MC13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Herd or solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Herbivore
INTELLIGENCE: High (13-14)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral good
NO. APPEARING: 1-4
ARMOR CLASS: 4
MOVEMENT: 27, F127 (C)
HIT DICE: 5

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6/1-6/2-12
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Trample
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Time stop
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 20%

SIZE: L
MORALE: Elite (14)
LEVEL/XP VALUE: 1,400

The burag are the horses of heaven, companions to princes and
sultans of virtue and the saviors of many holy warriors. They
choose their companions and call no rider master.

The buraq are dappled grey and white horses with the face of
a wise and powerful man. Larger than an ass and smaller than a
mule, their coats shine with a rich luster, even by night, that
signals their vibrant health and strength. The burag’s dappled
coat grows more brightly colored on its hindquarters, with
speckles of green, blue, brown, and black. Its tail is a long fan of
red, green, gold, and blue, with “eyes” like a peacock's tail. Its
silver hooves never need to be shod, and they strike the ground
in complete silence, even at a full gallop.

Combat: Although the buraq can serve as a warhorse, it rarely
takes any pleasure in such service. When it does serve in battle,
it avoids the fray and prefers its master take a position of leader-
ship without getting entangled in the melee. If necessary, it can
strike with its hooves for 1d6 points of damage each or bite for
2d6 points. A foe hit by both hooves is automatically knocked
down and trampled for an additional 2d6 points of damage per
round until he spends a complete round getting out from under
the buraq’s hooves.

As a traveler, the burag excels. It can gallop through the air at
the same speed as on ground, though it requires a running start
of at least three rounds before it launches itself into the air. A
buraq cannot stop moving once it is airborne. A trip of any
length can seem instantaneous to a buraq’s rider, because, if the
buraq wills it, a time stop is in effect on its back. A buraq can
use this ability to preserve the life of a mortally wounded, poi-
soned, or starving rider until it can reach help. Some riders have
crossed great distances this way and lived lives that seemed
much longer than those of common folk.

A buraq can speak with animals at will and has the ability to
comprehend languages three times per day.

Habitat/Society: The buraq is a friend to the faithful and the de-
serving, but before it will consent to take a rider, the rider must
gain its trust. This may either be done through a lifetime of good
deeds, close personal attention to the buraq (currying, combing,
braiding its mane), sharing of fresh fruit and sweets, bravery
and generosity, and a willingness to sacrifice the rider’s goals

 

 

 

 

 

and desires to fulfill the needs of others. The potential rider
must show mercy and respect for each person while balancing
his mercy with respect for the law and all the harsh justice it
sometimes demands. Few meet the buraq’s standards, and even
a single failure is enough to drive it away, never to return.

A burag always demands its master’s care and devotion in re-
turn for its service. In return, it offers good advice and counsel,
and it will serve fearlessly in the face of danger.

The burag can travel across any terrain unerringly by day or
night; it never gets lost because of its ability to navigate by the
sun and by the stars. Although it can cross straits and narrow
channels, it cannot cross oceans because it must rest on land
every night.

Herds of buraq are said to run free at the edge of the world
and in the green fields of Elysium, the Twin Paradises, the Hap-
py Hunting Grounds, Olympus, and the Seven Heavens.

Ecology: The buraq has the usual needs of a fine horse, but it
can survive without any physical nourishment at all. It thrives
on the care and attention involved in feeding and grooming,
rather than the food itself; the buraq can literally eat good inten-
tions. Thus, it could be well maintained by a big-hearted beggar
and it could wither away in the care of a distant, proud sultan.

The feathers of a buraq’s tail are valuable in the creation of
scrolls, especially scrolls of protection and clerical scrolls deal-
ing with curative and protective magics. A burag may occasion-
ally visit a renowned or particularly pious congregation of the
faithful or the hovel of a mystic and leave a single feather behind
as a sign of the gods’ favor. Combined with inks made from pre-
cious stones and gold dust, this feather may be used to inscribe
either a single scroll of protection or a scroll of up to 14 spell
levels in any combination (two 7th-level spells, two 5th-level
and one 4th-level, and so on).

©1992 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Camel

MC13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Desert Mountain Racing War

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any land Any land Any land Any land
FREQUENCY: Common Common Common Common
ORGANIZATION: Herd Herd Herd Herd
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day Day Day Day
DIET: Herbivore Herbivore Herbivore Herbivore
INTELLIGENCE: Animal to Semi (1-4) Animal to Semi (1-4) Animal to Semi (1-4) Animal to Semi (1-4)
TREASURE: Nil Nil Nil Nil
ALIGNMENT: Nil Nil Nil Nil
NO. APPEARING: 1-12 1-12 1-6 1-12
ARMOR CLASS: 7 7 7 7
MOVEMENT: 21 21 24 21
HIT DICE: 3 3 2+2 3+3
THACO: 17 17 19 16
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 1 1 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4 1-4 1-4 1-4/1-6/1-6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spitting, trample Spitting, trample Spitting, trample Spitting, trample
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil Nil Nil Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil Nil Nil Nil
SIZE: L (8' tall) L (8 tall) L (’ tall) L (8 tall)
MORALE: Steady (12) Steady (12) Unreliable (3) Elite (13)
LEVEL/XP VALUE: 65 65 75 95
Camels are the ships of the desert, and they carry a lifeline of Fully
trade and commerce in the caravans crossing the sands from city Normal Encumbered Encumbered
to city. Camels can withstand the rigors of desert terrain well _—_ Desert 250 400 520
but require careful, experienced handling. A camel’s humps al- Mountain 240 380 500
low it to go without food or water for up to two weeks. Racing 150 280 340

Camels are tall, spindly mounts, with padded feet and awk- War 200 300 400

ward saddles perched before their humps. Their fur varies from
white to pale tan to deep brown and from short, desert hair to
shaggy mountain camel fur. The rarer white camels bring 2-5
times the usual price, as they are considered lucky. Desert, rac-
ing, and war camels are all of the one-hump variety; mountain
camels have two humps.

Combat: Nasty-tempered camels have a 50% chance of spitting
at persons attempting to ride them or use them as pack animals.
The victim of a spit attack has a 25% chance of being blinded
for 1-3 rounds.

If frightened, there is a 25% chance that a herd of camels will
stampede. If a herd stampedes, roll 2d4 for each creature in the
path of the stampede who does not take cover (such as by hiding
in a tree or behind a rock pile or wall). This is the number of
camels trampling the exposed creature. Trampling causes 1-4
points of damage per camel. Trampled opponents cannot regain
their feet until the stampede passes.

Habitat/Society: Breeding camels of all types are especially val-
ued. Camels bear only a single offspring each year, and strong
and well-tempered animals are pampered to produce as many as
possible before their breeding days are done.

Like horses, camels can have grades of quality as described in
the DMG, page 36.

Ecology: Camels eat grass, grains, and shrubbery. They can
carry heavy loads for long periods of time. The following chart
shows the camels’ carrying capacity in gold pieces under various
loads. Camels are loaded while kneeling, and they often refuse
to get up under more than their encumbered load.

War Camel

Suitable for most types of warfare, these animals are trained not
to shy away from blood and mayhem. They attack with their
bite (1d4) and with their hooves, which cause 1-6 points of dam-
age each. If successful, the hoof attacks force the opponent to
remain prone. War camels are usually culled from the strongest
members of a group of desert camels and then trained intensive-
ly for several years. In some cases, however, they are bred ex-
clusively from retired war camels, thus improving the line.

Desert Camel

With their wide, padded feet and fat-rich, watery humps, desert
camels are ideal mounts for traveling through the wastes. They
are slow but steady animals, capable of taking heavy loads
through difficult climates and terrain. They sway more and
have a longer, more rolling gait than horses.

Mountain Camel
Mountain camels are common in the hills and mountains where
they serve as pack animals. They are not useful in the desert.

Racing Camel

Bred for speed rather than temperament, racing camels are the
most expensive and least likable camels. They are aggressive
and spit often, even at their trainers and riders. Their small
hooves and long, thin legs give them incredible speed, but they
are usually trained to accept only a very limited set of riders. A
good racing camel costs at least twice as much as a war camel,
and may cost much more.
Camel of the Pearl

MC13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day
DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: High (13-14)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Lawful good
NO. APPEARING: 1 (2-12)
ARMOR CLASS: 6
MOVEMENT: 24

HIT DICE: 5

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-8/2-12
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Trample
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Spells
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 10%
SIZE: G (30 tall)
MORALE: Elite (14)
LEVEL/XP VALUE: 1,400

Camels of the pearl are said to have been carved from a single
great pearl by Jisan of the floods at the dawn of the world, and
they have served the cause of good and righteousness ever since.
Their deep, enormous eyes reflect both their tranquility and
their great power.

Camels of the pearl are gigantic, positively elephantine ani-
mals with white fur, pearly eyes, and great power. They speak
as humans do, and know the language of giants, genies, and
others as well. They generally kneel when speaking to smaller
creatures, so as not to intimidate them with their size. Camels of
the pearl who have decided to serve as steeds are often fitted
with rich bridles, saddles, and trappings of silk, silver, samite,
bronze, and carefully-gilded leather. Somehow, though, even
the richest gear only makes a camel of the pearl seem more hum-
ble.

Combat: Camels of the pearl are powerful healers and teachers.
They have all the spell abilities of a 7th-level cleric with a 17
Wisdom. In addition, they can cure disease or neutralize poison
at will by licking the face of an afflicted person. Three times per
day they can create food and water to feed the hungry or the
poor.

Camels of the pearl can blight the ventures of those who
abuse their station or responsibilities, generally by teaching oth-
ers to resist and to demand fair treatment. They can also create
fool’s gold to bribe evil creatures with or to buy them off.

Camels of the pearl do not spit, but if severely provoked they
can fight as well as war camels. They can bite for 1-8 points of
damage and trample for 2d6. A successful trampling attack
forces the opponent to remain prone, giving the camel an addi-
tional +4 to hit on future trampling attacks. If a camel of the
pearl misses a trampling attack, its foe may regain its feet if it
undertakes no other action that round.

A camel of the pearl may become invisible at will.

Habitat/Society: Camels of the pearl seek out people and places
where they can be of service. They are glad to shoulder burdens,
but they also insist that those they help help themselves. They
often serve noble djinn and some desert giants as steeds and
symbols of authority.

 

 

 

 

 

Ecology: Camels of the pearl are omnivores, eating insects,
whole plants, grain, prepared foods, and even fish. They have a
definite sweet tooth and can sometimes be persuaded to stay in
an area longer than they might otherwise if they are plied with
sugar, honey, date wine, mead, confections, or sweet fruit. They
can travel without food or water for up to a month.

Camels of the pearl most enjoy the company of other lawful
good beings, but they are also willing to try to convert others
through their good example. They frequently minister to those
who would exploit them, but camels of the pearl are wise
enough to see through these attempts and leave any situation
where their good works are twisted to selfish ends.

The White Mirage

There are legends of the greatest camel of the pearl, a beast cre-
ated to serve the gods as their steed, carved from the heart of the
pearl that gave birth to all such camels. This animal is said to be
near immortal, still roaming the world thousands of years after
its birth, providing for the needy and calling down curses on
those who harm it or those who oppose the will of the Loregiver.

The White Mirage is most commonly encountered in the deep
desert by stranded or dying travelers, most of whom claim that
it led them to an oasis and healed them before leaving them on a
caravan route to be picked up by passing merchants.

It has all the abilities of the lesser camels of the pearl as well as
the spell abilities of a 20th-level priest. It appears only to trav-
elers who are both good and industrious; pious sluggards do not
gain its sympathy, nor do hard-working cheats. Those who are
both lazy and malicious will only regret meeting the White Mi-
rage; it may curse them with poverty, barrenness, the attentions
of genies, the evil eye, or rapid aging and decline. The curses
visited on such misguided souls generally mirror the sufferings
they have visited on others. In rare cases, they are given warn-
ings of what will come if they don’t change their ways.

©1992 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Centaur, Desert

MC13

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Subtropical/desert, grasslands
FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Tribal

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Omnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Low to Average (5-10)
TREASURE: M Q, (D, I, T)
ALIGNMENT: Neutral or chaotic good

 

NO. APPEARING:

1-8(70%) or 4-32(30%)
ARMOR CLASS: 6

 

 

MOVEMENT: 21

HIT DICE: 3

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4/14 and weapon

 

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Missile weapons
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (6' tall)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)
LEVEL/XP VALUE: 120

Desert centaur leader: 175
Desert centaur priest: 270

Desert centaurs are the ultimate fusion of mount and nomadic
tribesman—tough, slim, fast and stealthy nighttime raiders who
slip into enemies’ camps and then depart like shadows before the
dawn. They are as reclusive as their sylvan cousins, but just as
defensive of the lands they claim as their own.

Smaller than a sylvan centaur, they have barrel-like chests
(like ponies) and the long, thin legs of an antelope. The males
generally grow long beards which they elaborately curl and oil
into perfect form. The females wear the veil, but take few other
cares about their appearance. When traveling they carry their
goods in packs or drag them along in litters.

Combat: Desert centaurs are always armed, half of them with
light lances, the other half with short composite bows and scimi-
tars. In melee they make three attacks each round, two with
their sharp hooves for 14 points of damage each and one strike
with a hand weapon.

Desert centaurs are wary and prefer to strike from a distance
whenever possible. They are great at riding forward from am-
bush to fire missiles and then melting into the sands, only to
return later and strike again. They are willing to strike again
and again over a period of hours or even days to bring down
their prey and their foes. When the final assault comes it is pre-
ceded by a hail of arrows and followed up with a full charge of
lancers.

Habitat/Society: Desert centaurs are most active by night. Their
relatively large bodies and rapid movement make it easy for
them to overheat and suffer sunstroke when carrying heavy
loads, and thus they prefer the cooler nighttime temperatures.
In addition, their excellent night vision puts them at an advan-
tage relative to other desert dwellers; they suffer only a -1 at-
tack penalty in darkness, even with missile weapons. They can
see clearly up to 200 yards under moonlit conditions.

The territory of a tribe of desert centaurs generally extends
across hundreds of miles, and they are glad to steal cattle, cam-
els, or goats they come across, as they consider domestication of
animals a crime. Oddly, they see no contradiction in the fact

 

 

 

 

 

that they usually immediately butcher and eat the animals they
“free” from their owners.

Each tribe has a priestess who functions as a waterfinder and
reader of oracles. She has the abilities of a 3rd- to 5th-level ka-
hin. The priestess rules in all matters of justice among tribe
members and in all matters of diplomacy with other desert
dwellers. She usually speaks several languages other than her
own, such as the giantish trade tongue, the languages of nearby
humans, and sometimes even the languages of the debbi or the
vishap.

Raiding and hunting parties of desert centaurs are led by ex-
perienced trackers who have 4 HD but are otherwise identical to
their followers. They track as rangers. These leaders make the
final decisions as to where the tribe roams and where it raids.

Some desert centaurs serve as caravaneers or caravan guards,
usually employed as expert scouts. A few desert centaurs are
said to have settled down and irrigated the lands around oases
to create rich desert gardens. Although caravan masters and
travelers all know this to be true, no one can say where these
oases are. The farming desert centaurs either swore their discov-
erers to silence or subject the non-compliant to some worse fate.

All desert centaurs are polygamous; both males and females
may have up to four mates. Generally these families are cen-
tered around either a single powerful male or an influential fe-
male. With the exception of the priestess, females (also 3 HD)
and young (1-3 HD) only fight if directly threatened. They lash
out with their hooves for 1-4/1-4 points of damage.

Ecology: Desert centaurs are constantly seeking new hunting
grounds, new water holes, and new sources of resources for
bows and fletchings. They treat human and giantish desert
tribes with respect and are willing to make peace or raid them as
circumstances demand.

Desert centaurs avoid and fear the genies. They rarely enter
towns except to trade for goods they cannot produce them-
selves.
Copper Automaton

MC13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Ruins
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Constant

DIET: None
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1 (90%) or 3-18 (10%)
ARMOR CLASS: 3

MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 6

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6/1-6 or 2-12/2-12

SPECIAL ATTACKS:
SPECIAL DEFENSES:

Heat
Spell immunities

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil
SIZE: M
MORALE: Fearless (20)

LEVEL/XP VALUE: 650

Copper automatons are magical statues of copper and bronze
with hidden weights, levers, and clockwork gears, all of which
are held together by enchantments that cause them to move and
attack under particular circumstances.

Copper automatons are the results of artifice and skill, and as
such, these human figures of copper, iron, and bronze reflect the
whims and preferences of their makers. Some are tall and long-
legged, others short and stocky, but all share the same blank
eyes and corroding surfaces. Their metal plates are sometimes
embellished with silver or golden inlays. They are usually
sculpted to resemble warriors in armor, but they may just as eas-
ily look like nobles, peasants, or even humanoid monsters.

Slow but limber, their movements are regulated by the orders
given to them by their creators. Their mechanical limbs respond
quickly and powerfully, and their articulation is almost as good
as ahuman’s —their fingers can grasp, their waists can bend,
and their walk is even, if not as fast as a human’s.

Combat: Copper automatons attack with their fists, which nor-
mally strike twice for 1d6 points of clubbing damage. After a
single round of combat, however, their fists glow from internal
heat and their stunningly powerful blows now also do burning
damage for a total of 2d6 points of damage per strike. Creatures
immune to heat continue to suffer only 1d6 from the force of the
blows themselves.

Copper automatons are capable of handling weapons, and
some powerful creators give their copper automatons magical
weaponry to use in combat. These are almost always matched
sets of scimitars, daggers, maces or small axes. They may make
two attacks per round with these weapons without penalty,
though the attacks cannot be split among opponents. They can
heat iron weapons to a red-hot glow in two rounds; for the first
two rounds their weapons do normal damage, but each round
thereafter they add an additional 1d6 damage to each blow.

Copper automatons can only be healed through repair of
their metal components and the replenishment of their enchant-
ments. A wizard and a smith working together can heal a cop-
per automaton of 1d8 points of damage per day. If an
automaton is ever brought to 0 hp, it cannot be rebuilt, except
from. scratch.

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Copper automatons are the creations of wiz-
ards and artificers and are intricate, clocklike gearworks inter-
woven with magic spells to create creatures more mobile and
less awkward than golems. They are often used as slave labor in
smithies, construction projects, and water works, though the
magically-armed ones often act as guardians for valuables left in
wizards' homes while they travel the world. Their sleepless, un-
tiring, uncomplaining labor can bring wonders into existence in
short periods of time or in unlikely places. Palaces in the desert,
cleared and carefully tended plots in the jungle, or terraced gar-
dens in the mountains built and tended by copper automatons
have all been reported by travelers.

The secret of creating copper automatons is known to only a
few, and they are reluctant to share their knowledge. It requires
a mage of at least 9th level and a minimum of 10,000 gp to create
a copper automaton. The process takes at least two months and
involves the use of magma, copper ore, iron gears and lead
counterweights, and at least a single diamond as the source of
the copper automaton’s magical heat channels. In addition to
the purely physical framework, magical ingredients are required
to weave the needed enchantments around this physical chassis.
These additional requirements include oil of slipperiness (for the
gears) and the blood of a salamander or fire snake—even when
they are available, the price of these ingredients varies from
dear to exorbitant, and this expense may double the cost of an
automaton for a mage unable to produce or obtain the ingredi-
ents himself.

Ecology: Copper automatons require no food, no rest, and no
external energy source. They are entirely unnatural creatures
and have no role in natural ecologies.

The secret of creating copper automatons is said to have been
granted to human mages by the efreet, who hoped that they
could in time take control of the automatons to establish their
own rulership of human lands. The seclusion of copper automa-
tons from most civilized places has negated this plan.

©1992 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Debbi

MC13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical and subtropical/desert
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Pack
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Scavenger
INTELLIGENCE: Low (7)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: 1-8
ARMOR CLASS: 7
MOVEMENT: 15, Cl 6
HIT DICE: 1+1
THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Induce fear
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: S (2' tall)
MORALE: Unsteady (5-7)
LEVEL/XP VALUE: 65

The debbi is an unusual breed of desert scavenger capable of
forcing creatures much larger than itself into flight from water-
ing holes and from their prey because of its ability to instill mag-
ical fear. They are hateful and selfish creatures with not an
ounce of mercy in them.

Smaller than most useful dogs, the two-foot tall debbi is a
hairy creature halfway between a baboon and a hyena. It has
the snout, head, and powerful jaws of a bone-cracking scaven-
ger, with large ears and the body of a nimble monkey. They
have sharp fangs but use them only for fierce grimacing dis-
plays, not for biting. Their small hands are capable of manipu-
lating tools.

Combat: A debbi has the power to put all other animals and
men around it to flight through its primitive magical abilities.
The debbi can create fear by stamping its feet in a slow rhythm
and calling down magical power which makes its fur crackle
and spark. The chill in the air and the magical unease that it
conjures up seep into all nearby animals. The result is that any
creatures within 20 yards of a debbi when it begins its screeching
and stamping are affected as per a fear spell once per turn. This
fear lasts for two rounds per debbi in the pack. Usually all the
debbi in a pack bring on their fear effects at the same time, forc-
ing multiple saving throws by all nearby creatures and thus bet-
tering their odds of driving every creature away. If a creature
makes its saving throw versus a particular debbi, it will not be
affected by its power for at least the next hour; thereafter, it
must save again normally. The debbi uses this ability to drive
other creatures away from recent kills and from watering holes
so that it may eat and drink what they have worked for. All
debbi are immune to all forms of magical fear, and they are very
aware of when the effect of their magic wears off.

If forced into melee, a debbi uses a simple club, striking for
1-4 points of damage on a successful hit. Generally, however,
they attempt to flee if faced with serious opposition. Almost all
debbi are cowards at heart; their magic is bluster. They are ex-
cellent climbers and generally flee for the palms when in doubt.
They throw rocks and other missile weapons from their treetop
vantage point, but they don’t have the strength to hurl anything
large or dangerous enough to do damage to human-sized crea-
tures. These missiles may distract a spell-caster, however.

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: All other desert creatures despise the debbi, for
it takes what they have worked for and leaves them fleeing
across the hot sands. Debbi live a precarious existence, how-
ever, because they have trouble defending themselves from
predators at night, when the debbi rest. Although all might ben-
efit from cooperation in watching for danger then, they are too
selfish to look out for their fellow pack members, but they are
also too weak to escape a determined stalker like a cheetah or
lion. As a result, debbi are often slain at night, when they can be
taken unawares by the predators they stole from during the day.

They will also harass campsites at dawn and dusk, trying to
get mounts to scatter, searching packs for food, and even mak-
ing off with meals left unattended for an instant when the
campers flee the debbi’s crackling magical fear aura. Even if
there is no readily available food, the pack delights in tearing up
anything it can before the owners return.

Debbi packs are regulated by a strict pecking order. The
strong take what they want from the others and abuse them
mercilessly. The young are often mistreated by their elders if
their mothers are not constantly watchful.

Debbi are too barbaric to understand the value of treasure of
any kind. They value nothing they can’t eat. They can, how-
ever, sometimes be bribed with food.

Debbi who have taken over a rich hunting area or a clear wa-
tering hole then proceed to dirty their home with refuse, uneat-
en kills, and offal. Debbi always foul an oasis just before
leaving. Drinking from these polluted waters forces characters
to make a Constitution check at -4 or suffer from intestinal
parasites.

Ecology: The hair of this creature may be made into a talisman
and enchanted to cause others to fear the wielder as per a fear
spell once per day. For this reason they are often hunted by des-
ert shamans and even wizards from the great metropolises. The
unblemished hide of a debbi can fetch up to 200 gp in the mar-
ketplace.
Elephant Bird

MC13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Jungle
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Flocks
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Animal (1)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 10-100
ARMOR CLASS: 5
MOVEMENT: Fl 18 (C)
HIT DICE: 343

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: lor3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-10 or 1-4/1-4/1-6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Heated rocks
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (5’)
MORALE: Unsteady to Average (5-9)
XP VALUE: 420

The elephant bird is a man-sized bird with green plumage and a
yellowish, cruel-looking, curved beak. They have a strange,
protruding gullet dangling from their throats. Males often have
red “racing stripes” that run from their eyes to their tailfeathers,
while females are a rather drab green. Their cries are a harsh
squawk, distinctive to those versed in the ways of the jungle.

Elephant birds generally travel in pairs and threes, although
they are never far from the rest of their flock. When their leader
gives the signal, they mass for their hunting flights. They rise in
their hunting flight to create a huge cloud of green, and any
creature which has had experience with them will seek cover.
Anyone who has encountered these creatures when they are on
a hunting flight knows the reason they are called “elephant
birds.” When they begin their attack, it is apparent that they
could kill an elephant. Tales abound of such killings, the birds
assaulting their beleaguered prey until it finally perishes from
their massed attacks.

Combat: Elephant birds do not initiate combat unless they are
traveling in a hunting flight. When they have the advantage of
numbers, they are fierce opponents. Otherwise, they are gener-
ally harmless, preferring flight to combat.

In combat, elephant birds usually carry three stones in their
thick gullets. The birds superheat the stones in their body then
drop these stones on creatures they are attempting to slaughter,
causing 1d10 points of damage, as well as 1-4 additional points
of damage the next round, from the intense heat generated.
They can reharge themselves during combat if they can snatch
extra rocks for the attack. The superheating takes only one
round to accomplish. Each bird can carry only three stones.

If no rocks are available to the elephant birds, they attack
with their fierce claws and beak. The birds attempt to overbear
their opponents, adding 1 to their attack rolls for every three
birds in the attack. Once an opponent is prone, they add 4 to
their attack rolls for their beak strikes, and score automatically
with their claws for 1d4 points each. Their beaks rend their prey
for 1d6 points a round.

 

 

 

 

 

If they cannot overbear their opponents, they will attempt to
land on them and blind them with flapping wings and flying
feathers. Although this attack causes no damage, it does force
the opponent to attack at a -3 on his attack roll.

Habitat/Society: Elephant birds dwell near clearings in the leafy,
humid jungles of Zakhara, or in the thinning trees at the edges of
these jungles. Their relatively open habitat enables them to re-
spond quickly to the presence of prey in the jungle or near the
perimeter.

Their nests are generally located in the upper reaches of the
trees, where they can spot those who seek to harm them long
before any damage is done. Their eggs are prized as a delicacy
by many jungle creatures, although the predators only dare to
approach the nests while the birds are hunting. Even then, there
is always the chance that several birds have remained behind.

Ecology: Elephant birds feed on nearly anything they can find,
although they prefer freshly killed meat. If none is available,
they will eat carrion. If there is no carrion, they can survive by
eating berries, worms, insects, or grains. By working together,
elephant birds have established themselves at the top the food
chain, feeding on what they like, avoiding those who would
feed on them. Few predators hunt the elephant bird. Its only
natural enemies are humans and humanoids. Since the birds are
a menace to humanoids as well as their crops, beings who live
near the elephant bird hunt them at every opportunity. For this
reason, elephant birds avoid human territory. They will occa-
sionally venture into human and other settlements if food is
scarce or the pickings look especially good.

©1992 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Gen

MC13

 

 

 

 

 

 

Air Fire Sand Water
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any Any Any Any
FREQUENCY: Uncommon Uncommon Uncommon Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Tribe Tribe Tribe Tribe
DIET: Omnivore Omnivore Omnivore Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7) Low (5-7) Low (5-7) Low (5-7)
TREASURE: Nil Nil Nil Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Neutral Neutral Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1 1 1 1
ARMOR CLASS: 5 5 5 5
MOVEMENT: FI 12 (B) 18 9 Sw 12
HIT DICE: ¥ master’s level ¥ master’s level % — master’s level Wy master’s level
THACO: Varies (dependent on Varies (dependent Varies (dependent Varies (dependent

on Hit Dice) on Hit Dice)
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 1

on Hit Dice) on Hit Dice)
1 1

 

 

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6 1-6 2-12 1-6

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil Produce flame Nil Nil

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Fly Nil Nil Breathe water
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil Nil Nil Nil

SIZE: S (8" to 12") S (8" to 12") S (8" to 12") S (8' to 12")
MORALE: Fanatical (18) for a Fanatical (18) for a Fanatical (18) for a Fanatical (18) for a

sha’ir’s first gen
Varies (dependent
on Hit Dice)

LEVEL/XP VALUE:
on Hit Dice)

Gen are small elemental genies who willingly serve as magical
familiars to the sha’ir, the special mages of the Land of Fate.
Sha’ir cannot work magic without them, as gen are the creatures
responsible for seeking out the magic which a sha’ir wishes to
use, searching through the elemental planes for pockets of ele-
mental and other magic to power their master’s spells. The vari-
ous gen are also called wind gen or djinnlings, sand gen or
daolani, sea gen or maridans, and fire gen or efreetikin.

Gen resemble the province they represent. Wind gen are small
air sprites with bluish skin and white hair. They are unnaturally
thin and their skin seems almost transparent in bright light.
Their color and mood are sometimes related to the weather; a
wind gen before a storm turns dark grey and fidgety, a wind gen
on a beautiful calm day is quiet and pale blue.

Fire gen are miniature fire spirits with ebony skin and long,
flame-red hair. Their fingers end in long, reddish claws that they
wiggle constantly. They are hyperkinetic — getting a fire gen to
sit still is impossible. Fire gen are also pyromaniacs and must be
tightly controlled to prevent them from playing the arsonist.

Water gen are small water spirits with greenish skin and blu-
ish eyes and hair. Their hair is often wet and matted with sea-
weed or tangled with bits of flotsam. They are graceful whether
in or out of water. They enjoy decorating themselves with
pearls, shells, and other treasures of the sea.

Sand gen have tan skin and jet black hair, and their bodies are
squat enough to resemble globes with limbs. They tend to move
with a certain clunky weight. They care nothing for gems and
jewelry except insofar as they are tasty.

All gen are short, a maximum of 1' tall. When appearing and
disappearing to fetch and return with spells for their masters,
they fade into their element. Sand gen sink into the floor, fire
gen slow down and fade like dying coals, wind gen disappear
like a sudden breeze, and water gen either dissolve into the near-
est body of water or evaporate into the sky.

Combat: Wind, fire, and water gen are weak in combat, causing
only 1d6 damage with their tiny hands or claws. However, all

sha’ir’s first gen
Varies (dependent

sha’ir’s first gen
Varies (dependent
on Hit Dice)

sha’ir’s first gen
Varies (dependent
on Hit Dice)

gen have various elemental abilities they use to their advantage.
The wind gen can fly and will avoid melee whenever possible.
Flame gen can produce flame at will and generally do unless
prohibited by their sha’ir. They will not use this flame to burn
an opponent, but may attempt to ignite clothing or some part of
an opponent’s surroundings, causing burn damage indirectly.
Water gen can breathe underwater and swim well. Sand gen use
their great strength to inflict greater damage (2d6) than might be
expected for their size.

All gen make saving throws at twice their master’s current
level or HD. All attack forms based on any gen’s element suffer
a -2 penalty, all saving throws against that element are at +2,
and all damage from that form of attack is at -2 per die. This
magical protection applies to the gen at all times.

Habitat/Society: Gen are menial servitors among the elemental
planes, fetching and carrying for their masters. When its master
dies, it returns to its elemental plane. When a gen dies, the sha’ir
suffers, but a gen can be restored to life.

Wind gen are often aloof and moralistic. They tend to give
their masters unwanted advice about everything that they are
doing wrong and how people could be better and happier.

Fire gen are malicious and judgmental. If given a moment
alone, they will start fires, pry into places they are not wanted,
and pontificate on the faults of everyone they see.

Maridans are capricious and playful. Their feelings are hurt
easily when their pranks and playfulness are rebuffed.

Sand gen are tactless and direct. They simply tell what they
know, and they have little sympathy for anyone in trouble.
They think about their own needs first, and they are not shy
about letting their masters know what they want.

Ecology: When left to themselves, gen rarely form societies of
their own; they are almost inevitably captured and bound to
servitude by more powerful creatures of the elemental planes.
Their simple needs are provided for by their masters, and gen
are fanatically loyal to their masters.
Genie, Noble Dao

MC13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Elemental earth, mountains
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Khanate
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Very to Exceptional (11-16)
TREASURE: U,Q(x10)
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 0

MOVEMENT: 12, Fl 21 (B), Br 9
HIT DICE: 12+3

THACO: 7

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 4-24 /4-24
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 20%

SIZE: L (12' tall)
MORALE: Fanatic (17-18)
LEVEL/XP VALUE: 11,000

Noble dao are the rulers of the genies from the Elemental Plane
of Earth. They command earth elementals, dao, xorn, and other
slaves who toil for them searching for the gems they prize. Their
attitude toward all other races can best be described as callous.

Noble dao are bald and squat, and both sexes are fond of ear-
rings, turbans, and heavy necklaces. Male dao nobles are fond
of beards and moustaches, which they take great pride in and
often sculpt into ridiculous points, curls, and blocky forms.
Their skin varies in all the colors of earth and stone, from grey
and brown to tan, white, and ebony. Their ears are pointed and
their retractable fingernails are unnaturally durable claws of
pure metal, capable of tearing through flesh and armor. These
nails give their fingers a pudginess and a stiffness of movement
that remains with them even in other forms.

Combat: Dao enjoy combat only when they already know the
result. Their stratagems and plans for both melee and war re-
volve around stacking the deck in their favor as overwhelming-
ly as possible before a dispute even begins. They are great fans
of spies, bribery, and mercenaries and will never fight any battle
when someone else can be paid to do it and suffer the losses.
However, when forced to defend themselves, noble dao are
rarely unprepared. They generally seek to summon reinforce-
ments and delay opponents while a crushing counterattack or
ambush is prepared.

Noble dao can use any of the following spell-like abilities at
will three times per day, one at a time: change self, detect good,
detect magic, assume gaseous form, polymorph self, become in-
visible, fulfill the wish of a creature from the Prime Material
Plane (in a perverse way), cause misdirection, passwall, create a
spectral force, and create a wall of stone. Noble dao can cast
sand whisper and dust curtain at will, turn rock to mud six times
per day, and dig a dozen times per day. They can also cast repul-
sion, stoneskin, and domination once per day. Noble dao per-
form all magic at the 24th level of spell use. When in gaseous
form, noble dao resemble a dusty cloud or sandstorm.

It is possible for dao nobles to carry up to 2,000 pounds with-
out tiring. Double weight will cause tiring within three turns.
(For every 200 pounds of weight under 4,000 the dao may add
one turn to the duration of its carrying ability.) After tiring, a
noble dao must rest for six turns. Note that dao can move

 

a
“Y

 

 

 

through earth (not worked stone) at a burrowing rate of 9. They
cannot take living creatures with them.

Noble dao are unaffected by all earth magics, but take three
times normal damage from holy water. They are also immune to
maze spells.

Habitat/Society: Noble dao rule various rifts of the Great Dis-
mal Delve in the Plane of Elemental Earth, although many of
them spend much of their time at the side of the khan who rules
them all. Stately processions between their rift estates and the
court of the khan occur frequently; in times of unrest dozens of
noble processions may wind their way across the Great Dismal
Delve every day as dao nobles attempt to protect their estates,
possessions, mining dispensations, and trading rights from in-
fringement or destruction. A dao mazework far from the Seven-
fold Mazework is usually home to 1-6 noble dao, 4-40 common
dao, and 8-80 elemental and nonelemental slaves—vassals, ser-
vants, and miners who continually expand the dao estate.

The Great Khan of the Dao rules in splendor in the Sevenfold
Mazework, the city at the center of the Great Dismal Delve. The
noble dao vary in power from the lesser atamen and hetmen
who only visit the Sevenfold Mazework to the favored sene-
schals. The loyalty of the ataman or hetman who acts on the
advice of a seneschal is always questionable, but the seneschals
are always chosen by the khan of the dao, and their loyalty is to
him alone.

The miles of three-dimensional convolutions and magical dis-
tortions which make up the Sevenfold Mazework are said to
confuse even minotaur slaves, but noble dao understand its
windings, twists, and spirals instinctively. Since each noble is
occasionally given the unavoidable honor of paying for and su-
pervising additions to the mazework, the khan is able to expand
it perpetually at very little cost to himself. More rarely, an obso-
lete, unfashionable, or over-traveled section is closed off and
filled with rubble from new digging elsewhere. The mazework
connects to pockets of all the elements, and gates connect it to
the other elemental planes.

©1992 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Genie, Noble Dao

Light in the mazework is kept deliberately dim, as it is entirely
lined with mica, pyrite, hematite, and carefully cut, reflective
semi-precious stones —light is reflected over and over again
down the corridors. Bright lights are used as alarms to instantly
alert nearby chambers of some emergency. Dim colored lights
serve as signals for slaves and servants to attend to the nobles.

Nobles of the court of the great khan live in self-contained
sections of the Sevenfold Mazework known as halls or wings. A
typical seneschal’s residence might contain 1-6 male dao nobles,
2-12 female dao nobles, 4-24 common dao, 2-12 minotaurs, 10-
100 elemental and nonelemental slaves. Summoned elemental
creatures are either special servitors, slave overseers, or pets.
The home of a minor noble dao who keeps a primary estate far
away in the provincial sections of the Great Dismal Delve is typ-
ically home to half as many occupants as indicated above.

Female noble dao are responsible for the care and well-being
of the slaves and the oversight of new excavations, though they
may not choose where and how much to dig. This gives them
considerable influence, though they are bound by custom to
their mates in all other things. Some female dao are granted rec-
ognition as atamen and hetmen, but they are strictly excluded
from the world of haggling and commerce (including the buying
and selling of slaves). All dao consider trade too vulgar and
dangerous for the female nobles to engage in. Some female dao
nobles have, through special dispensations from the khan, been
allowed to use their private holdings as the basis of lucrative
money-lending businesses.

Ecology: Seneschal dao extract as much work from the atamen
and hetmen as they can, and, likewise, atamen and hetmen push
their slaves as hard as they dare. They are sharp traders, always
able to turn business to their advantage; they are notoriously
hard bargainers, especially with creatures not native to the Ele-
mental Plane of Earth. They are always willing to see how far
they can push a mercenary before he will betray them. Noble
dao tend to see others only in terms of how much profit can be
made from them or how much power can be gained over them.

Some dao take a perverse pleasure in destroying the posses-
sions of others while increasing their own wealth and prestige.
This is rare, as most noble dao would rather buy or steal a pos-
session for themselves than destroy it. However, joy in the mis-
fortune of others is an entrenched part of noble dao culture
among the highest grades of nobles (those living in the Maze-
work itself). Building a new wing in the Sevenfold Mazework
may become twice as difficult if the project is opposed by noble
dao in wings nearby. Successful human traders have occasional-
ly been sabotaged by envious dao. Dao nobles hate marid and
djinn, but they are on speaking terms with efreet, who trade
worked metal for minerals. All other elemental creatures are on-
ly of interest to the dao insofar as they can be exploited.

Great Khan of the Dao

The Great Khan of the Dao is also known by a multitude of
titles including Ataman of the Mountains’ Roots, Caravaneer of
the Sevenfold Path, the Perfect Compass, the Stone Sultan,
Carver of Destiny, Master of Traders, the Fountain of Wealth,
and Balancer of All Earthly Accounts.

The Great Khan is always planning new engineering projects,
and his followers surround him with new ideas for additions to
the mazework, new caravans, financial tricks to turn greater
profits on his trade routes, and inventions to increase the effi-
ciency of his slaves. He is constantly accompanied and assisted
in his work by 1-6 tasked builder genies, 3-30 common mer-
chant dao, 2-20 common warrior dao, and 1-10 noble dao.

The Great Khan has all the abilities of a noble dao and access
to all the spells of the province of sand magic once per day. In

MC13

addition he may cast suggestion at will merely by speaking for a
full round—no gestures are required. He can cast maze once per
month. He has 25 Hit Dice and maximum hit points. The khan is
immune to all weapons made of metal or stone, though wooden
weapons affect him normally.

The khan is unusually fat for a dao, with none of the strength
of limb that most of his nobles possess. However, his eyes are
bright with schemes and he has a quick wit. He has a great inter-
est in technological improvements such as optics, systems to
transfer mechanical power from one set of belts and gears to
another, alchemical findings, and developments in metallurgy
and mining such as new pumps, shorings, and refining tech-
niques.

The audience chamber of the Great Khan is called the Hidden
Fulcrum of the Dao. It is hidden deep within the Sevenfold
Maze, and not even all the noble dao know where it is. Visitors
who desire an audience are expected to bribe guards and even
noble dao to win entrance to the corridors of power. These gifts
or bribes are often discussed quite bluntly, and the amounts
vary from 10-80,000 gp. Once a bribe is taken, nothing may
happen or the fortunate visitor may be informed (within 1-4
weeks) that a few moments of the khan’s time have become
available. All visitors are blindfolded and led through the maze-
work to the court, a process that requires several hours depend-
ing on which path is taken to the center. The khan has cunningly
had the Hidden Fulcrum covered with mirrors that reflect his
image all around the supplicants who visit him, so that his true
location is very difficult to determine. The khan prefers to ask
constant questions rather than listen to the pleading and presen-
tations of visitors.

Supplicants are often advised to strip themselves of wealth
before entering the mazework, as the khan prefers that his sub-
jects and his audiences be humble and poor. Those poor souls
who arrive resplendent in finery and jewels are generally asked
to make gifts of their riches to the khan.

The Great Khan rarely leaves the environs of the Sevenfold
Mazework; when he does it will be to accompany some vital
caravan or to personally supervise the haggling for and obtain-
ing of some great prize object or rare material needed for the
magics found in the Mazework. (His caravans are usually com-
prised of 10-100 common dao and 1-3 noble dao.) The khan pre-
fers to travel incognito when with merchant dao, as his
well-known skills at appraising and haggling make others reluc-
tant to deal with him if they recognize him.

When the Great Khan of the Dao travels to the Prime Materi-
al Plane, his arrival is always preceded by a powerful earth-
quake capable of shaking down fortress walls and altering the
course of rivers. Once he has arrived he generally travels to the
accompaniment of smaller tremors, as his processions often
take him through hills and mountains rather than over them. In
the desert, his procession (containing no less than 2-200 jann
and 2-16 dao) creates a huge sandstorm wherever it passes.
Genie, Noble Djinni

MC13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Elemental air, desert
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Caliphate
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: High to Genius (13-18)
TREASURE: U

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic good

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 1

MOVEMENT: 12, Fl 36 (A)

HIT DICE: 10+3

THACO: 9

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 3-24

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Lite

SIZE: L (12° tall)
MORALE: Champion (15-16)

LEVEL/XP VALUE: 10,000

Noble djinn are the rulers of all genies on the Elemental Plane of

Air, and they are masters of the province of wind. They can
speak their own tongue and that of any intelligent creature they
meet through a limited form of telepathy. They never forget ei-
ther a service or a slight from another creature.

Noble djinn pride themselves on being the tallest and fairest
of their kind. They enjoy wearing jewelry and rich clothes to
distinguish themselves even further from common djinn. They
prefer loose, lightweight silks and cottons.

On their home plane, noble djinn are always accompanied by
processions of 4-40 common djinn who are their courtiers, sol-
diers, fan-bearers, minstrels, grooms, and servants. On the
Prime Material Plane, noble djinn are always carried by either
an animal (such as an elephant or camel) or in a rich palanquin
by four servants. Under no circumstances will they allow their
feet to touch the ground. Ideally, of course, djinn nobles travel
by air under their own power, but often wind and weather or
the need to enter a city in grand style dictate that they travel
near the ground. Noble djinn sneer at life forms unable to fly
naturally and will generally hover over earthbound nobles of
other races to make their point.

Combat: The noble djinn can create nutritious food for 4-24
people, create water or wine for 4-24 persons, create soft goods,
including nonmagical cloth, wood, brass, copper, or tin items
(up to 25, 16, and 9 cubic feet of each) with permanence, create
iron, gold, platinum, and silver items of short life span (about
24 hours), create illusions with visual, thermal, audible, and
tactile components which last without concentration until dis-
pelled, become invisible, assume gaseous form, windwalk, or
form a whirlwind. In their gaseous form, noble djinn resemble
clouds. In addition, a noble djinni may cast gust of wind at will,
cloudkill once per day, control weather once per week, and air-
walk on up to seven other creatures once per day. Once per
year, a noble djinni can cast windtomb. All noble djinn magic is
cast as if at the 20th level of ability.

Noble djinn can grant three wishes to their masters, but if
they are forced to grant such wishes they will undertake no oth-
er service; they are freed of their servitude upon granting the
third wish. These wishes are only granted to creatures from the
Prime Material Plane.

  

 

 

 

 

A noble djinni’s whirlwind is a funnel 20’ across at its base,
60’ across at its top, and 100’ high. It requires five rounds to
form and five rounds to fully dissolve. It lasts for as long as the
noble djinni concentrates on it. Nonaerial creatures of less than
three Hit Dice are swept away and killed by the whirlwind while
hardier beings take 3-18 Gd6) points of damage. This whirlwind
may also carry up to 15 man-sized creatures or 6 djinn- or jann-
sized creatures, which may be protected from harm by the gen-
ie’s will. Whether carried creatures are harmed by the whirlwind
or not, they can be transported at a movement rate of 21 and a
maneuverability class of B as long as the noble djinni’s concen-
tration is not disturbed.

Air-based attacks are utterly useless against noble djinn, in-
cluding poison gases, gaseous breath weapons, cloudkill, wind
control, and all elemental air spells.

Noble djinn are too intelligent and too powerful to be cap-
tured by physical means. Magically enslaved noble djinn will
refuse to extend their abilities to the fullest for their masters un-
less they are constantly deferred to in matters of opinion
(though they will still obey orders), given slaves of their own to
replace the ones they no longer have at their disposal, and gen-
erally treated as equals or even superiors.

A noble djinni can carry up to 2,000 pounds either afoot or
flying without a penalty to movement, though they consider
such work beneath them. They can carry double that weight for
three turns afoot or a single turn while flying. (For each 200
pounds less than the maximum, add one turn to the time before
tiring.) A fatigued noble djinni must rest for six turns before at-
tempting further strenuous activity.

Noble djinn rarely allow themselves to be drawn into direct
combat with opposing forces, preferring to command common
djinn or summoned creatures to fight for them while casting
spells and giving orders. If possible, noble djinn will use their
illusion and invisibility spell-like abilities to avoid combat alto-
gether, and under no circumstances will they do combat in an
unfavorable elemental environment, such as underground.

©1992 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Genie, Noble Djinni

Habitat/Society: Noble djinn are of two types. Most are local
caliphs, sheiks, sherrifs, and maliks who rule over a small num-
ber of landholders. These noble djinn command small groups of
djinn scattered throughout the Plane of Air. A typical local ruler
commands 1-6 households, each of which consists of 3-30 djinn,
1-10 jann servants, and 1-10 elemental creatures of low intelli-
gence. The local sheik or headman of each of these holdings is a
djinn of maximum hit points. In general, noble djinn who dwell
and rule on the Prime Material Plane command only a single
household. Female noble djinn take part as leaders of their peo-
ple, and they have more freedom than the common djinn.

Any holding attacked by a large or dangerous force sends
messengers cloaked by invisibility to the nearest two holdings,
which each send two more messengers, until the entire djinn na-
tion is warned. Some noble djinn also raise homing pigeons and
other flying animals to accomplish the same end. Other nobles
have raised falconry and the husbandry of fancy talking birds,
tumblers, pouters, and other unusual breeds to a fine art.

A smaller but more influential group of noble djinn spends its
time at the court of the Great Caliph of the Djinn, known as the
Court of Ice and Steel. This rich palace is carved from a huge
glacial rock which perpetually hurtles through the gulf of Ele-
mental Air, creating a permanent rush of wind throughout the
court. The chambers of the court are secured by steel portals set
deep into the ice, and the air is only still in any one of the Court's
rooms when all the portals to that room are shut. Whenever the
portals open, a blast of wind stirs the curtains, banners, and
clouds of incense throughout the room. Illumination comes
from flickering orange lanterns or from the blue light that filters
in as it refracts through the glacial ice. Most chambers are only
accessible to flying creatures, as there are no stairs, and hall-
ways are just as likely to be vertical shafts as horizontal ones.
Visiting creatures not native to the Plane of Elemental Air are
usually escorted everywhere to ensure their safety, and to allow
the Great Caliph of the Djinn to keep an eye on them.

The noble djinn of the Court of Ice and Steel are the viziers,
beys, and emirs. They only leave the premises when they are
commanded to assume the onerous duties of rulership over
groups of djinn elsewhere or when compelled to answer the
summons of a powerful sha’ir.

Noble djinn are rarely pleased to serve even the most power-
ful of human wizards, and if the servitude drags on for months
they may complain bitterly of the duties they are neglecting by
serving a human. Noble djinn who are mistreated and who
make their way back to their estates will return with half their
subjects to avenge their honor.

Ecology: Noble djinn require very little from other creatures, as
their djinn subjects provide them with all the necessities of life.
However, their constant rivalry both among themselves and
with other noble genies leads them to strive for the richest gems,
jewelry, cloth, spices, and perfume they can obtain. Often man-
ners and ethics are no obstacle to a noble djinni on the trail of
something unique. Noble djinn will sometimes send their ser-
vant creatures to obtain these sorts of riches from the Prime Ma-
terial Plane.

Noble djinn hate the efreet and will cooperate in any attempt
to harm them. Despite their haughtiness, noble djinn respect in-
dividual achievements and will cooperate with other creatures
of the Elemental Plane of Air rather than attempting to enslave
them. Their servants are retainers who may leave at any time,
but stay because they consider it an honor to serve. From time
to time, a particularly driven noble djinni will undertake either
a raid or a crusade against the dao or efreet and seek to free
slaves and embarrass opposing nobles. Since those genies are
generally more powerful than noble djinn, these expeditions are
rare.

MC13

Great Caliph of the Djinn

The ruler of the djinn is known by a long list of titles includ-
ing, but not limited to, the Commander of the Four Winds,
Ruler of all Djinn, Defender of the Heavens, Prince of Birds,
Storm of the Righteous, and Master of the Air. He is always at-
tended by his courtiers, who number 4-20 noble djinn (half of
whom are his dancers and consorts), 40-400 jann, and 10-100
common djinn at any given time. The Great Caliph of the Djinn
rarely leaves the Court of Ice and Steel; he is perpetually called
upon to decide matters of state, matters of law, and matters of
politics among his nobles. When he does leave, it is generally
with an entourage of nobles to go hunting elemental creatures,
though occasionally they go to the lands of Zakhara to stir up
trouble among the cities there.

Infrequently, the Great Caliph will demand a procession be
held (in his honor or to celebrate the anointment of a new noble
djinn or a noble marriage). These processions are grand affairs
involving at least 50 noble djinn, 100-1,000 common djinn, and
clouds of banners, flags, and streamers. The course of a proces-
sion often takes it in loops, rolls, and dives, and its meandering
path often tours the Plane of Elemental Air for days or weeks.

The Great Caliph has 15 +6 Hit Dice and maximum hit points
for a noble djinn. In addition to having all the usual powers of a
noble djinn, the caliph has access to all spells of the province of
wind magic once per day. He is always surrounded by a gentle
breeze, which stirs his hair and flowing garments. All hurled
and ranged missile weapons are ineffective against him, as the
winds protect him, acting as permanent protection from normal
missiles and protection from magical missiles spells.

The Great Caliph of the Djinn is fickle and easily bored, but
this by no means indicates that he is soft or unable to rule. When
required, he can rouse genie armies to victory and can wrestle
monsters into submission. In general, however, the caliph pre-
fers to win his battles by his wits rather than by the strength of
his armies or his magic. Since the efreet that often harass the
djinn are individually stronger than the djinn, this tactic is com-
mon among lesser djinn as well.

The court chamber itself is at the center of the Court of Ice
and Steel, with clear shafts running to the outer surfaces in all
directions. Creatures who (willingly or unwillingly) gain an au-
dience with the Grand Caliph are brought to hover before him.
If they cannot fly under their own power, they are buffeted by
the whirlwinds of their djinn guards for 3d6 points of damage
each round. Presenting oneself as earthbound before the Great
Caliph can be exhausting. The chamber of the court itself seems
to be in perpetual motion, as layers of silk streamers constantly
flutter in and out. In dealing with creatures not from the Plane
of Elemental Air, the Great Caliph is inclined to be merciful and
often ends his recitation and judgment within a matter of a few
minutes.

When traveling to the Prime Material Plane, the arrival of the
Great Caliph of the Djinn is always signaled by a great blast of
wind. Once there, he often travels in a procession like that of
noble djinni, only of twice the usual size.
Genie, Noble Efreeti

MC13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Elemental fire, desert
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Sultanate
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day
DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Very to Exceptional (11-16)
TREASURE: U
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: -1
MOVEMENT: 12 Fl 30 (B)
HIT DICE: 13

THACO: 7

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 4-32 /4-32
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 15%

SIZE: L (15' tall)
MORALE: Fanatic (18)
LEVEL/XP VALUE: 11,000

These hulking warlords are the cruel rulers of the efreet, though
in theory they all obey the Sultan of the City of Brass. They plot
and scheme against one another with a degree of cunning and
skill usually seen only in the Lower Planes. They care nothing
for humans and generally try to corrupt those sha’ir powerful
enough to command them. Their arrogance and lust for power
have won them few friends on either the Elemental or Prime
Material Planes.

A noble efreeti is even more massive and solid than a com-
mon efreeti, though they share the same appearance: skin the
color of basalt, hair of brass, and eyes of flame. The noble efreet
wear baggy pantaloons, a shoulder harness for swords and dag-
gers, and massive jewelry, generally armbands and earrings.
The males enjoy showing off their muscled chests and broad
shoulders, and so only wear tunics and cloaks when cold de-
mands it; this is a matter of status and pride in strength rather
than pure vanity. Noble efreet are not as vain as other genie no-
bles, as they depend on force and treachery rather than wit, ap-
pearances, and skill to persuade their fellow nobles to follow
them. Their goal in choosing weapons, clothes, and jewelry is as
much to intimidate others as to adorn themselves.

Combat: Noble efreet are powerful warriors, trained in magical
and physical combat from a very young age. Although they are
masters of strategy and trickery, they delight in the raw power
that bloodshed gives them, and they lead their followers in bat-
tle rather than skulking in the rear.

Noble efreet can perform each of the following spell-like func-
tions three times per day: grant wishes to creatures from the
Prime Material Plane, become invisible, assume gaseous form,
detect magic, enlarge, polymorph themselves, create an illusion
with visual, olfactory, tactile, and audio components which will
last without concentration until touched or magically dispelled,
sunscorch, misdirect, or create a wall of fire. When in gaseous
form, noble efreet resemble smoke, often in an undefined pillar
shape. When polymorphed among humans, a noble efreet often
takes the form of a colorful rooster or a youth of sterling fea-
tures. A noble efreet can also produce flame, flame arrows, sun-
dazzle, or cause pyrotechnics at will. Fire attacks do no harm to
noble efreet if the fire is nonmagical; magical fire causes half
damage. In addition, once per day noble efreet can sow fire

 

. OKO Fe:
wy ”

 

rs

nd Zz —
4 tpresyy VP! ll lite otiyppyy, wnerilift YY) ty he v,,
Wy 4, sits oh - gummi ty y b,

 

seeds or surround themselves with a fire shield. Once per week
they can use fire track. Once per month a noble efreet can cast
conflagration. Noble efreet perform all magic at the 16th level of
spell use.

Noble efreet can carry up to 3,000 pounds, afoot or flying,
without tiring, though they will only do so if magically compel-
led or in fear of their lives. They can carry double weight for
only a limited time—three turns afoot or one turn aloft. (For
each 300 pounds under 6,000, add one turn to either walking or
flying time permitted.) After tiring from extreme exertion, a no-
ble efreeti must rest for six full turns. Normally, noble efreet
command common efreet to perform all such tasks.

When hunting, noble efreet enjoy the kill but prefer not to do
all the work of wearing down an opponent themselves. They
prefer to watch as their common efreet hunters and summoned
creatures (such as hell hounds) harry the prey, then throw them-
selves into battle at the last minute to claim a kill. Toying with
one’s opponents is considered an art form among the noble
efreet, and their ability at playing “cat-and-mouse” is remark-
able. They also employ flying creatures of the Elemental Plane
of Fire as “hawks” in their hunts.

Habitat/Society: Noble efreet fall into two camps: those native
to the City of Brass and those who command the efreet of the
Prime Material Plane. The city itself hovers in the hot regions of
the Plane of Elemental Fire and often borders seas of para-
elemental magma and lakes of glowing lava. It is a huge, glitter-
ing haven of avarice and malice 40 miles wide, its base a
hemisphere of golden, glowing brass. From the upper terrace
rise the minarets of the great citadel of the Sultan’s Palace,
where great riches are said to be kept. The beys and amirs of the
City of Brass serve the Sultan of the Efreet; though the lesser
efreet are neutral, their rulers are more inclined to law and evil
than their subjects. Though the streets of the city are kept clean
and the palaces are showpieces in a gaudy way, an air of blood
and suffering hangs over everything, due largely to the number-
less glum servants found on every street and in every hallway.

©1992 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Genie, Noble Efreeti

While most noble efreet fill their palaces with rich works of
gold, priceless ceramics, and masterfully-woven rugs and tapes-
tries, others merely create temporary illusionary treasures to
impress their visitors as needed. Female noble efreet are kept
apart in a state of seclusion from male company, but they do
have their own heirarchy within households. They hold no offi-
cial power with the sultan and his court, but the scheming na-
ture of the efreet results in many of the females effectively ruling
through figurehead males.

The palaces of noble efreet in the City of Brass are large and
imposing and swarming with servants. A typical noble house-
hold consists of 1-6 noble efreet, 440 common efreet who serve
as overseers and bodyguards, 10-100 jann and other imported
slaves, 10 summoned intelligent elemental creatures for special-
ized tasks, 2-4 nightmares, and 3-18 elemental hawks and
hounds. The slaves of the efreet are magically protected from
the flames of the city, but these protections must be renewed
each week. Thus, escaped slaves rarely survive their freedom.
The palaces are all small fortresses as well as overflowing dens
of slavery, able to keep out spies, assassins, hostile nobles, and
the merely curious while providing spacious quarters for the no-
ble family.

The beys and amirs of the city are each responsible for 1-4 of
the efreet’s military outposts elsewhere on the Plane of Fire, each
of which is a haven for 4-40 efreet ruled by a malik or vali (com-
mon efreet of maximum normal hit points). These outposts are
strictly military and spartanly functional. The only chamber of
any comfort whatsoever is the chamber the bey or amir occu-
pies when he visits, a duty most beys and amirs perform as in-
frequently as decorum permits. Each outpost usually houses
10-100 prisoners and captives who are being broken to a life of
service to the efreet.

The noble efreet of the Prime Material Plane are servants of
the six great pashas who rule them in the sultan’s name. Their
camps are generally deep in the desert, often in ruined or aban-
doned cities. If their camps are discovered they are moved over-
night to a new location, either by physically transporting all the
goods of the genies in the camp or by transporting the same in
the twinkling of an eye through the use of magic.

Noble efreet are great patrons of the hunt and are often found
whiling away their days using both elemental hawks and
hounds to track down the odd animals of the Elemental Plane of
Fire. They also enjoy the use of bronze chariots pulled by night-
mares in slave hunts. Their elemental hawks and hounds are
sent ahead, and common efreet are often used as beaters to flush
out game. These hunts involve 1-6 noble efreet and their retinue
of 5-30 common efreet servitors, as well as 2-20 hounds or
hawks. The nobles each have their own chariot.

Ecology: Noble efreet see all living things as either their servants
or their enemies and acknowledge no one but their caliphs and
pashas as their masters. Thus their reaction to other races is usu-
ally to either force them into servitude or to destroy those who
cannot be enslaved. This has made them greatly feared by other
creatures of the Elemental Plane of Fire, but it hasn’t won them
any friends. Almost all salamanders, fire elementals, and other
natives of the plane will gladly assist those who wish to embar-
rass the efreet. There have been cases of efreet princes who have
demonstrated better behavior when wooing human maidens.
However, even in these cases the noble efreet often demand that
their true nature be kept hidden from other humans. Whether
this is due to magical limitations, a wish to escape the notice of
other genies, or some other reason is unclear. For the noble
efreet, the wooing is just another form of the hunt.

MC13

The Sultan of the Efreet

The master of the City of Brass is also referred to as the Lord of
Flame, the Incandescent Potentate, the Tempering and Eternal
Flame of Truth, Fuel of the Unquenchable Legions, the Most
Puissant of Hunters, Marshall of the Order of the Fiery Heart,
the Smoldering Dictator, and the Crimson Firebrand. The Sul-
tan of the Efreet is constantly accompanied by a horde of 20-70
common efreet bodyguards, 1-20 entertainers, and 4-40 noble
efreet courtiers, all of them vying for his attention and approv-
al. This circus can be quite comical, though laughing in the pres-
ence of these efreet worthies is invariably fatal; they take
themselves very seriously indeed.

The Sultan of the Efreet has 20 Hit Dice and maximum hit
points. He has all the powers of a noble efreet as well as access
to all spells of the province of fire magics once per day. In addi-
tion, he may use flames of justice at will. The Sultan is also im-
mune to both magical and normal fire, and he is constantly
surrounded by a nimbus of pale red fire and a halo of smoke.
These cause 1d10 points of damage to anyone within 10’ who is
not immune to both magical fire and poison gas. No amount of
water or magic can douse his magical fire.

The sultan sports a tiny goatee, his hands end in extremely
long, almost knifelike claws, and his eyes constantly spark like
fire. Due to his aurora of flame, the sultan wears only clothes
capable of withstanding extreme heat, generally armor of white-
hot iron, but sometimes delicate pantaloons and robes made of
tiny blackened links of adamantite. His armoring gives the sul-
tan an Armor Class of -5.

Audiences with the Sultan of the Efreet are held in an iron
chamber at the center of his palace in the City of Brass, a smoky
blast furnace of a room with reddish light and little air. Orna-
ments of alloyed gold and brass are everywhere, and chained
fire elementals provide both heat and light.

In fulfilling his military duties, the Sultan often organizes
drills, marches, and parades of spit-and-polish precision. These
occasions require the entire population of the City of Brass to
turn out and watch the spectacle of the sultan’s might march by;
indeed, the disruption of thousands of efreet marching through
the streets and turning the squares and suqs into drillgrounds
makes undertaking any other task impossible.

When he travels to the Prime Material Plane, the Sultan of the
Efreet always first appears as a firestorm that scorches the earth
for hundreds of yards around. He prefers to appear in extremely
hot environments like volcanoes, hot springs, and forest fires.
This is not done out of any deference to the property or lives of
creatures unable to withstand fire, but simply for his own com-
fort in adjusting to the frigid temperatures of the Prime Material
Plane. Once he has arrived, he travels with a full military escort
of 20-200 jann, 2-20 common efreet warriors, and a single noble
efreeti emir. These numbers are tripled when visiting the pashas
of the Prime Material Plane, whose loyalty must always be en-
forced with an iron fist.
Genie, Noble Marid

MC13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Elemental water, seas
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Padishate
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Genius to Supra-genius (17-20)
TREASURE: TU
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic

NO. APPEARING: i

ARMOR CLASS: -2

MOVEMENT: 12, Fl 21 (B), Sw 30
HIT DICE: 16

THACO: 5

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 8-32/8-32

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 50%

SIZE: H (22' tall)
MORALE: Fanatic (18)
LEVEL/XP VALUE: 17,000

Noble marids are masters of the oceans. With currents as their
muscles and pearls as their teeth, they are the handsomest and
most powerful race of geniekind.

Both huge and hugely powerful, noble marids can assume
three forms: gaseous, liquid, and solid. In their watery form no-
ble marid are a rushing current; in their gaseous form they re-
semble a fog. In their solid, humanoid form they are gigantic,
gleefully towering over everyone around them. Their skin shim-
mers like pink pearls, though occasionally a noble marid will
have the luster of either a white or black pearl. Their wispy hair
is usually blue-black or dark grey. Noble marids typically stand
22 feet tall and weigh over 8,000 pounds.

Noble marids are always clad in the finest clothes they can
afford, but both male and female noble marids enjoy displaying
their powerful physiques to intimidate smaller and lesser crea-
tures. Male noble marids prefer to be bare-chested and wear
elaborate pantaloons and turbans, while females prefer slit
skirts and clever tunics that show only flashes of their pearly
skin. Their garments are cut from huge swatches of bright cloth
and decorated with as many attention-grabbing jewels and or-
naments as they can find. Subtlety is not their strong suit.

Combat: Noble marids’ spell-like abilities function at the 30th
level of spell use. Their magic allows them to use any of the fol-
lowing spell-like powers four times per day: detect evil/good,
detect invisibility, detect magic, invisibility, assume liquid
form, polymorph self, and purify water. Twelve times per day
they can assume gaseous form, lower water, part water, create a
wall of fog, or bestow water breathing on others for up to one
full week. They can cast airy water, control weather, cone of
cold, and solid fog once per day. Once per month a noble marid
can cast maelstrom. Noble marids can always cast water blast,
which they can direct in a powerful jet up to 300 yards long,
blinding the individual struck for 1d6 rounds (saving throw ver-
sus spell applies) and causing 2d6 points of damage. Marids also
have the innate ability to water walk.

A noble marid can freely carry 4,000 pounds in weight. Dou-
ble this weight causes tiring in three turns. (For every 400
pounds under 8,000, add one turn to the marid’s carrying abili-
ty.) A tired marid must rest for six turns. Since marids travel
often and widely, they only rarely become attached to enough

 

 

 

 

 

heavy objects that they cannot carry all they have with them.

Marids are very strong swimmers. They can breathe water
and are at home at any depth. They have infravision to 120’.
They are unaffected by extremes of water temperature — they
are equally comfortable alongside icebergs or in scalding water.

Noble marids are not harmed by water-based spells. Cold-
based spells inflict either half or no damage. Fire inflicts +2
points per die of damage, with saving throws at a -2 penalty.
Steam does not harm them.

Habitat/Society: Although all marids lay some claim to nobility
or even royalty, the truly noble marids are those that serve the
padisha and scheme to succeed to the rulership of the empire
upon her death. Thus noble marids entirely ignore their lesser
cousins unless they in some way affect their standing at court or
in the succession. All marids agree that their loose empire is
ruled by the padisha, but there have often been several “true
heirs” to the padisha’s throne simultaneously through the eons.
The court of the Great Padisha of the Marids is called the Cita-
del of Ten Thousand Pearls, and it is an elaborate and graceful
circular reef in warm waters on the Elemental Plane of Water,
full of bright corals, corroded copper doorways, giant clams,
bubbling air fountains, curtains and carpets of kelp, and schools
of every sort of fish. Some of these fish are guardians and others
are servants, but all are entirely loyal to the marids. The citadel
contains from 2-200 noble marids at any time.

Although most of the Citadel of Ten Thousand Pearls is acces-
sible by swimming through passages and doorways made for
the huge marids, there are also many narrow crevices accessible
only to small fish or marid in their watery form. These passages
connect all the larger areas as well as hollow regions of the cita-
del not otherwise accessible.

Shafts of sunlight pour into and out of the citadel at appar-
ently random places, but no area is without light unless the pa-
disha wishes it. Some of the deepest interior portions are said to
contain the hoarded treasures of the deep, given to the Padisha
of the Marids as tribute: gold, shells, corals, the scales of great

©1992 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Genie, Noble Marid

MC13

 

sea-monsters, and ten thousand pearls of great price. These
pearls are of all colors, principally pink, white, grey, and black,
and most are said to be fist-sized and lumpy rather than smaller
and more perfectly formed.

The Citadel of Ten Thousand Pearls is a resting place for
many marid nobles, a place to meet and exchange information
before traveling on. Hunts and jousts are often held there, and
individual valor is prized. At other times (during unfashionable
seasons known only to court “insiders”), the citadel is as aban-
doned as a ruin.

The traveling household of a noble marid consists of 1-4 no-
ble marids and is always accompanied by 1-8 common marids,
who comprise various cousins, vassals, lovers, courtesans, fol-
lowers, and kinfolk. In many cases (40%), they have also be-
friended 2-9 (1d8+1) servant creatures from the Elemental
Plane of Water. They may have dragon turtle mounts, a squad-
ron of water elemental or triton bodyguards, morkoth advisers,
or killer whales as hunting animals. The fickle and wide-ranging
tastes of the noble marids make the exact nature of their non-
marid companions unpredictable.

Marids are champion tale-tellers, though most of their tales
emphasize their own prowess and belittle others. When con-
versing with a noble marid, one must attempt to keep the con-
veriation going without continual digression for one tale of
might or another, while not offending the noble marid. (Marids
consider it a capital offense for a lesser being to offend a marid.)
Flattery sometimes convinces them to undertake some course of
action, but more often than not they stray off their intended
course to seek some other adventure that promises greater glory.
Bards often win their favor by restructuring all their songs and
tales around the glory of the marid. This requires both a quick
mind and a strong stomach, however, as the noble marids enjoy
waves of praise rather than faint endorsements.

Marids occasionally go on punitive expeditions against the
other genies, just to remind them of their power. When they or-
ganize a war party, it is usually led by a single noble marid ac-
companied by 5-50 common marids and 2-20 creatures from the
Elemental Plane of Water.

Ecology: Noble marids have the least impact on other races of
any of the noble genies; their attitude to the rest of the world is
that all other creatures are inconsequential beings. The marids’
own concerns take up so much of their time that they have little
effort to waste on what they see as the trivialities and irrelevan-
cies of others. In most cases, this includes common marids as
well, which is why almost every marid must declare himself a
noble in order to get the attention of the true noble marids.
Their absorbtion in their own affairs is a blessing for others,
given the dangerous level of power of the marid nobles. When
they do want something, noble marids stop at nothing to get
it—entire fleets may disappear from the oceans, storms rage,
and rivers dry up or overflow.

Mages consider marids more trouble to conjure than they are
worth, and the great power of the noble marids and their even
greater fickleness makes this doubly true. A conjured and
bound noble marid who is released will put aside all other tasks
to gain quick vengeance against the mage who stole his free-
dom.

Great Padisha of the Marids

The Great Padisha of the Marids has hundreds of titles, many
of which are copied from her followers or adopted by them. She
is the Keeper of the Empire, the Pearl of the Sea, the Mother of

Foam, the Maharaja of the Oceans, Emir of All Currents, Mis-
tress of Rivers, Grand Raj of the Monsoon, General of the
Whales, Pasha of Corals, Savior of Fish, Marshall of Nets, and
Patron of Waterspouts.

Her courtiers typically include 1-20 noble marids, 5-500 com-
mon marids, and 10-100 visiting creatures of elemental water
ranging from tritons to hippocampi to giant seahorses. The
Great Padisha has all the abilities of a noble marid, and she has
access to all spells of the province of the sea once per day. She is
immune to all spells involving water, ice, steam, and electricity.
She is subject to a continual detect lie spell, which doesn’t seem
to stop her from enjoying outrageous flattery. She simply recog-
nizes it for what it is and doesn’t allow it to influence her actions
as a ruler. The Great Padisha has 30 Hit Dice and maximum hit
points.

The current Great Padisha’s appearance is subject to dispute.
At times she has ebony skin the color of black pearl, a rounded
face, and long tresses of coral red which she has bound about
her head like a turban and set with black opals. At other times
her skin is lustrous pearly white, with hair dark as barnacles,
and lips like conch shells. She prefers slashed robes of gold, sil-
ver, or blue which reveal either richer cloth or dark skin be-
neath.

The court meets in the depths of the Citadel of Ten Thousand
Pearls. The Pasha prefers to dazzle visitors with an initial dis-
play of her command of the seas, including things like unbalanc-
ing tides, schools of colorful fish swimming in dazzling patterns,
or a display of bizarre luminescent creatures from the darkest
recesses of the ocean’s trenches.

The padisha’s whim completely determines the type of audi-
ence her supplicants receive. Some are richly rewarded for
merely reciting her titles and honorifics; others are cast forth
from the citadel and told never to return. Those she takes more
seriously (generally noble marid, commoners who can boast
well, and the occasional egotistical or flattering sha’ir) are given
her undivided attention and probed and questioned on every
statement they make. Unusual gifts are always appreciated,
though she feels no sense of obligation to grant favors in ex-
change for treasures freely given. Gifts need not be material
ones; beggars capable of spinning rich tales and richer compli-
ments have won her favor, as have ancient mystics who have
little wealth but great understanding.

The Padisha has kept her position because of her political
acumen and skill at maneuvering in the politics of honor, her
competitive generosity, and her knack at making the haughty
marids feel like members of the same tribe rather than bitter ri-
vals.

Although the Great Padisha has a love of display for its own
sake, she rarely joins processions beyond the confines of the Cit-
adel of Ten Thousand Pearls because of the political dangers and
costs of leaving her nobles to scheme. The migrations of the
whales and salmon and the blooming of the red tides are state
occasions, however, requiring the presence of both the Padisha
and her nobles. At these times she relocates her entire court,
thus preventing any coup while she is away and preoccupied.

When the Great Padisha appears on the Prime Material Plane
she always arrives as a localized monsoon, driving ships ashore,
drenching the countryside with flooding rains, flattening palms,
and whipping up enormous waves. Once she has arrived she
generally travels with whales, sea monsters, and entire tribes of
intelligent sea creatures such as mermaids and sahuagin.
Genie, Tasked — General

MC13

 

 

Tasked genies may once have been genies of one of the four ele-
mental realms. However, tasked genies have performed a single
type of labor for so long that their forms have been permanently
sculpted to suit their work. Their profession defines them and
rules them; a tasked genie taken away from its work grows
weak and sickly. Unlike most genies, tasked genies are not al-
ways uneasy or hostile in the presence of humans. They are still
very proud of their superior skills, but their sense of worth is
based on achievements, not birth. As long as they share an in-
terest and aptitude for their craft and a willingness to defer to
the genies’ greater knowledge, humans can consort with tasked
genies with no ill effect.

Just as faerie creatures are more than mortal but less than di-
vine, so are tasked genies among the most powerful spirits of the
Land of Fate. Specifically, genies are elemental spirits which
serve the unsympathetic forces of nature. They are free-willed,
civilized, and highly intelligent. They eat, drink and reproduce
just like humans, and they can die just as humans die. Their
powers, however, inspire such fear and awe in the minds of
primitive tribesmen that they are still worshipped and offered
sacrifices as gods in remote and savage areas of the Burning
Land. They can raise buildings overnight, their armies can ap-
pear and disappear from the field of battle, and their magic can
whisk a person hundreds of miles in moments.

Most genies prefer to dwell apart from humans, but tasked
genies are equally at home in the wilderness and in the cities.
Genies that live on the elemental planes rarely come to the Land
of Fate unless called, but elemental genies and some tasked gen-
ies who live in the Burning World prefer uninhabited wilder-
nesses, ruins, deserted houses, cemetaries, rivers, and
abandoned wells. Those who trespass on the home of a genie are
usually warned off by an attempt to frighten; stones are thrown
at the intruders by invisible genies or sudden sandstorms spring
up to blind, confuse, and misdirect. If the trespassing continues,
the travelers are attacked and shown no mercy.

The genies of Zakhara are nomads of a sort; their camps
among the desert and ruins and their lodgings in the cities may
disappear in an instant (usually at dawn or dusk), whenever a
genie tribe decides to move on. But their camps don’t resemble
the camps of nomads. They are often huge mansions or fortress-
es, yet they may vanish into the sands when discovered, like a
dream fading in the morning light. At other times, however,
genies in the wilderness take their discovery by others rather
badly, and, instead of moving on, they try to force their discov-
erers away by throwing stones at them or by carrying them on
the wind for many miles. For this reason, travelers through the
desert often call out to the genies when approaching desolate
lands and ask them for permission to pass through.

Unlike the genies of the four elements, tasked genies have
very little regard for the castes, classes, and social distinctions of
humans, as their lives and their status among their kind are al-
most entirely dependant on merit. Tasked genies have no nobili-
ty, only masters of their craft. They will as soon work for a
pauper as for a sultan, as long as there is work to be done.

This lack of elitism does not mean that genies do not under-
stand the nuances of politeness and proper etiquette. They may
not think much of their master, but they will be unstintingly po-
lite. Of course, genies can and do turn social conventions
“topsy-turvy” when they are free to harass someone who has
offended them or even just when the mood strikes them.

Tasked genies fall into two main categories: those bound by
their profession to a certain location and those kept inactive in
some way for long periods between bouts of servitude. The first
group comprises the helpful tasked genies, those who create
fantastic foods, art, and monuments. The second group has
nothing to do when not called upon by genie nobles or powerful
sha’irs. They are slowly driven insane by their magical isola-

tion, and for this reason they delight in shedding blood when
released from service. These include the warmonger, slayer, and
guardian genies.

Tasked genies must always be either paid or enslaved before
they will render service to a nongenie. Architect, artist, guard-
ian, herdsman, and winemaker tasked genies are almost always
simply paid for their work, as enslaving them decreases the
quality and length of their service. Slayers are almost always
enslaved, as they are too dangerous to be allowed to roam free
and they cannot be expected to uphold any bargain they make.
Warmonger tasked genies may either be paid or enslaved, but in
either case their true reward is the sight of victory on the battle-
field. The sweeping events they set in motion often continue
long after the warmonger genie has been imprisoned or sent
away.

Binding a particular tasked genie is a difficult undertaking re-
quiring great wealth, wisdom, and patience. The procedure is
equivalent to spell research, with the same costs and chances of
success. Only a sha’ir may successfully learn the rituals for bind-
ing a tasked genie. The determination of success is made with
the level of the spell being researched treated as equal to the
tasked genie hit dice divided in half (round up). Thus, learning
to bind a herdsman tasked genie requires as much effort as
learning a second-level spell, while the ritual for commanding a
guardian tasked genie will be discovered as if it were a seventh-
level spell. Once the initial research is done, the tasked genie
may be bound or commanded as detailed for sha’ir abilities.

Though only a single genie may be bound by a spell, some
tasked genies will request aid from their brethren when com-
manded to undertake a large, short-term project for their mas-
ters such as shearing a huge herd of sheep or building
fortifications in time to hold off invaders. Herdsman and build-
er tasked genies are particularly prone to calling on their kinfolk
when presented with a huge task. These genies serve without
demanding pay from the sha’ir so as to free their cousin from
service more quickly. A sha’ir may bind no more than one
tasked genie per year or face the wrath of the genie princes when
he asks for an audience.

All tasked genies are extremely long-lived. Guardians are the
tasked genies with the greatest longevity; they can serve for
1,001 years, so their age is truly great. Others, such as winema-
ker and herdsman tasked genies, are more closely tied to the sea-
sonal cycles of the Land of Fate, and this seems to have made
them shorter-lived than most genies. Their lifetime is only twice
that of a human. The other tasked genies fall somewhere in be-
tween, with a great deal of individual variation. Tasked genies
kept from their tasks invariably live short lives.

Genies occasionally take human lovers, but the result is al-
most always tragic. Those who love the genies lose all sense of
reason and judgement and are often destroyed by their love for
such a powerful spirit. Occasionally, however, the pair makes
its peace and lives happily, almost always after a stormy court-
ship and almost always only after leaving human society. These
liasons rarely produce children, but when they do the offspring
have the powers, strength, and abilities of markeen, though
they do not have a human double.

©1992 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Genie, Tasked, Architect/Builder

MC13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day
DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Genius (17)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1
ARMOR CLASS: 4
MOVEMENT: 15

HIT DICE: 9

THACO: 11

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 4-24
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (7’ tall)
MORALE: Average (8-10)
LEVEL/XP VALUE: 5,000

The builder genies were once dao, but they have been reshaped
by a life of construction and design. They are common in the
Great Dismal Delve, but they are also sometimes bound by
sha’ir to serve human princes. Some of them have been given to
other noble genies as gifts from the noble dao. Their powers are
responsible for many of the tales told of cities springing up over-
night at the command of the genies.

Builder genies are bald and muscular like the dao, and they
share the same taste in clothes and jewelry. They are often
branded with a dao symbol denoting ownership, usually on the
hand or forehead. They almost always carry drawing compass-
es and rulers, plumb bobs, chalk, levels, trowels, and builders’
squares.

Combat: A builder genie may use each of the following spell-
like abilities three times per day: minor creation, vacancy, and
warp wood. They may use each of the following once per day:
stone shape, stone tell, and passwall. Once per month they may
grant a wish related to buildings or construction.

Builder genies have a stupendous ability to find and exploit
the weak points of any structure. When they direct the fire of
siege engines against fortifications, structural damage done by
the attackers is increased by 50%. A builder genie can collapse
unfortified buildings and underground works in one turn if al-
lowed to study them for an hour.

Unless a builder genie is commanded to defend a building, it
will prefer to avoid combat and simply repair minor damage
after a battle is resolved by others. If commanded to, a builder
genie will defend its worksite, but it cannot be commanded to
take part in battles outside buildings or in buildings it has had
no part in making. Much like their dao brethren, builder genies
prefer to let others do their fighting for them and will balance
the odds in their favor as much as possible before a battle. They
enjoy using mazes, battlements, and secret passages to lead op-
ponents on chases through entire buildings that they have pre-
pared with traps and ambush sites. In desperation, a builder
genie may collapse part of a building it is working on to kill
opponents who might otherwise destroy the whole project.

Habitat/Society: Builder genies live for their work; they want to
be remembered for what they have done rather than for what

 
  

 

 

pleasant genies they were to work with. This generally means
that they are merciless on themselves and others when their
work is at stake. The greatest compliment one can pay a builder
genie is to admire his work; the greatest insult one can offer is to
compliment the builder while criticizing his work.

Builder genies don’t care what they build; waterwheels or
mosques with a dozen minarets receive equal care and planning.
In all cases, builder genies will demand the longest-lasting and
most expensive materials. Due to these stringent demands, the
cost of a building designed or built by a builder genie will be
four times the normal cost. It will have twice the strength and
twice the useful life of a normal building.

Builder genies can imitate the style of any building they have
seen, though they can only reproduce the structural details of
buildings they have been able to examine closely for a day. They
prefer to work in a style appropriate to the setting of a building,
but they will build an opulent mausoleum in the middle of a
poor fishing village if their master so commands. They will not
hesitate to tell their master exactly why such a building is inap-
propriate among the dhows and huts, however. While their
master’s project is always completed if at all possible, its final
form may not be exactly what the patron had in mind. Builder
genies can be notoriously literal in obeying instructions, and
they can also bend instructions to suit their personal whims.

Ecology: Builder genies are slaves to the dao, and they resent the
dao without being able to overthrow them. They are on excel-
lent terms with the xorn, earth elementals, and pech. They are
always willing to destroy existing structures to make way for
their new, improved ones, although in the case of a master-
work, the builder genie may tear down the old and then rebuild
it with improvements that only a master architect or stonemas-
on might recognize.

Builder genies judge others on their building achievements.
Races that have not built mansions, bridges, and graceful gates
do not rate as civilized. Builder genies have great respect for the
disciplined and exact hives and warrens of giant insects.
Genie, Tasked, Artist

MC13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Cities
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Genius (17)
TREASURE: R (x3)
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 5
MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 7

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (7’ tall)
MORALE: Unsteady (5-7)
LEVEL/XP VALUE: 975

Tasked artist genies include both incredibly skilled craftsmen
and aesthetically brilliant artists in fields widely accepted as
high art. Both groups are capable of producing masterworks in
their chosen speciality in a very short period of time. Reshaped
from dao and djinn long ago, they will willingly serve a gener-
ous master, though they always undertake work they enjoy be-
fore doing work that they must do. Tasked artist genies are
poets, composers, musicians, sculptors, painters, and weavers.
The craftsmen genies (who bitterly deny that their work is any
less artistic than that of the pure artists) are potters, woodwork-
ers, furniture makers, silversmiths, goldsmiths, decorative iron-
mongers, gemcutters, jade and ivory carvers, calligraphers,
illuminators, gardeners, maskmakers, tailors, haberdashers, and
seamstresses,

Mistreated artist genies will never produce superior work,
though they have too much devotion to their craft to deliber-
ately flaw a work (unless they are consistently abused with no
hope of escape). Regardless of how hard they try, works pro-
duced by enslaved or charmed artist genies are never quite as
good as those they make when they are free to pursue their work
as they choose.

Of all the tasked genies, artist genies vary the most in their
appearance, perhaps because the work they do varies so much.
Sculptors have powerful shoulders from handling and hammer-
ing stone, weavers have powerful arms and quick fingers for
throwing a shuttle across a loom, and painters may be quite frail
but have a sharp eye for details and decoration. The craftsmen
genies all have nimble fingers and a good sense of proportion.

Combat: Although their professional skills vary, all artist genies
have a set of spell-like abilities in common. They are able to use
each of the following spell-like abilities twice per day: duo-
dimension, mirror image, illusion, polymorph self, and_ stone
shape.

The illusions of artist genies create both tactile and visual
components which last without concentration until dispelled or
touched with cold iron. These are often used to give visible form
to mental models and ideas before a final, lasting product is pro-
duced. It may also be used by the less scrupulous artist genies to
satisfy their patrons without a great deal of effort being expend-
ed in actual work.

 

 

Pty,

 

 

Habitat/Society: Artist genies are adaptable and generally take
on the trappings of the group they work for or live among. They
are particularly sharp rivals with each other, as few others can
match their skills. Artist genies will talk shop with anyone they
consider able to understand their achievements; they have only
scorn for the unskilled or untalented.

In their dress, artist genies either push the boundaries of the
latest design and daring or wear the most shabby and dated
clothing imaginable. The pure artists are entirely hedonistic,
though this is manifested in various ways. Some artist genies
require odd foods, such as stewed apples or fermented fish while
others must have parks and scenic vistas to stroll along each day
for relaxation and contemplation before their work will achieve
its highest level. Others still wallow in drink or gluttony, con-
stant hot scented baths, or exotic companionship.

Slighting the work of an artist genie demands retribution, but
this revenge can take many forms. A skilled critique by a
knowledgable patron may earn only some vicious gossip in re-
turn. In the case of uninformed criticism by a pretender to
knowledge, some artist genies are unstable enough to simply
hurl themselves at their detractor, regardless of the conse-
quences. Others are wise enough to enjoy more subtle forms of
revenge (for example, creating a work that ridicules the offend-
ing party). Sometimes revenge takes the form of a gift that is
given to some rival of the tactless speaker, or a mysterious in-
crease in the cost of producing new work for a patron. Some
forms of revenge are fatal, such as a potter genie adding enough
poison to a clay vessel to slowly kill anyone who eats or drinks
from it.

Ecology: Artist genies are dependant on refined patrons and
high levels of cultural achievement. Although they may be
found anywhere, their skills are only fully appreciated by the
knowledgable. Their material needs are often neglected in favor
of getting the materials they require, for an artist genie taken
away from the tools of its trade and forced into idleness for pro-
tracted periods either dies or goes mad.

©1992 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Genie, Tasked, Guardian

MC13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore

INTELLIGENCE: High (14)

TREASURE: F,G,Z

ALIGNMENT: Lawful

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: -4

MOVEMENT: 15

HIT DICE: 14

THACO: 7

NO. OF ATTACKS: 4

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-10/1-10/1-10/1-10
or by weapon +8 (x4)

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 25%

SIZE: L (10’ tall)

MORALE: Fanatical (17-18)

LEVEL/XP VALUE: 13,000

Guardian genies are powerful spirits sworn to defend specific
items and locations tirelessly and without fail. They were once
efreet, but have been reshaped to be both sleepless and loyal to
the exact wording of their oath.

Guardian tasked genies have one face which watches forward
and another which watches backward. They have dark red skin
as thick as rhinoceros hide and are completely bald. They have
four powerfully muscled arms, which make them formidable in
combat. A typical guardian genie stands 10’ tall and weighs
2,700 pounds. Guardian genies do not wear armor, as their
thick hide and magical nature make them very difficult to hit,
and armor would merely slow them down. Some of their mas-
ters, however, occasionally give them protective magical items,
which they are expected to use.

Combat: Guardian tasked genies move with inhuman speed de-
spite their bulk, gaining a -4 initiative modifier in all forms of
combat (although their initiative result never drops below 0).
They target spell-casters before all others. Guardian genies are
able to wield weapons in all four hands simultaneously without
penalty. They can engage and attack up to four opponents at
once, though they usually concentrate their attention on just
one or two. Their preferred weapons are scimitars, cutlasses,
great scimitars, and throwing axes and daggers. When using
weapons they gain all the benefits of a Strength ability of 20.

The hearing of guardian genies is acute enough to pick up a
feather falling onto a stone at a hundred paces; this, combined
with their 360-degree vision, makes them impossible to surprise.
Guardian genies never sleep.

Due to their innate magical ability, guardian genies can use
each of the following spell-like powers twice per day: shout,
alarm, silence (15' radius), detect invisibility, guards and wards,
wyvern watch, and sepia snake sigil. They can employ blade
barrier once per day.

Guardian tasked genies are unaffected by all illusion/
phantasm and enchantment/charm spells. All other magic af-
fects them normally if it overcomes their magic resistance.

Guardian genies can breathe a cloud of green fire 30’ in diam-
eter directly in front of themselves once per day. The cloud of
fire causes 14d6 points of damage to those caught in its area of

 

“ROXAS 92.

 

 

effect, with a save allowed versus breath weapon for half dam-
age. The cloud resembles the fiery breath of the fire eaters some-
times seen in the sugs and bazaars of Zakhara.

Guardian genies have a 20% chance to possess powers in ad-
dition to the ones listed above and a 30% chance to have powers
that simply replace 1-4 of the above powers. Examples might
include flight, detect lie, the ability to shape glyphs of warding
or explosive runes, hold portal, dimension door, and other abili-
ties that might be expected to help a guardian.

Habitat/Society: Guardian tasked genies are solitary creatures
and dislike social interaction. They speak in very clipped sen-
tences if required to, but they do not encourage questioning. In
fact, they are completely humorless about their tasks, following
out their routines and procedures with methodical precision.
They are perfectly willing to describe what they are guarding
and who commanded them to guard it, though they will not tell
anyone about what they can do to prevent its theft. (One of the
conditions of their service is that they be told everything about
the items left in their care.) Guardian genies will not guard liv-
ing creatures. Guardian genies cannot be bribed and will attack
any creature that attempts to do so.

Guardian tasked genies have no love of death and violence,
although they are more than competent at dealing out both. If
possible, they will use threats and warnings rather than immedi-
ately resorting to magical or physical combat.

Guardian tasked genies serve for limited periods of time;
when their tour of duty at a given site is up, their services must
be renegotiated. Since their contracts are typically for 101 or
1001 years, their former masters are often not around to renew
their arrangements.

Ecology: In some ways, guardian tasked genies are frustrated
creatures, for they can never finish a task and go on to do some-
thing else as craftsmen genies of various kinds can. They are
required by their nature to be constantly vigilant. No genie will
touch a treasure guarded by the tasked guardian genies, though
they may advise others how a guarded treasure might be taken.
Genie, Tasked, Herdsman

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Plains
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Family
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)
TREASURE: D for group, P otherwise
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1-100
ARMOR CLASS: 6
MOVEMENT: 21

HIT DICE: 3

THACO: 18

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: By weapon type
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (6' tall)
MORALE: Steady (11-12)
LEVEL/XP VALUE: 175

Capable of running all day with their herds, herdsman tasked
genies are dedicated and sociable creatures. They live to provide
for their animals, and they take their nourishment from them as
well, often in the form of blood drained from small puncture
wounds or from their milk.

Herdsman genies are short and wiry, with very quick hands
and heavy brows. Their skin is dark and wrinkled from years of
exposure to the sun and wind. Their hair is dark as jet and falls
in loose curls (though the sun soon bleaches it to a reddish-
brown in those who do not wear head coverings). Herdsman
genies smell like their animals and often also have a vaguely
rancid smell from the overripe milk products they eat.

Combat: Herdsman genies only fight in self-defense or in de-
fense of their herds. A group of them will use short composite
bows (30%), spears (40%), and short swords (30%). Some
tribes use lassoes when they wish to capture prisoners. In addi-
tion, herdsman genies can use each of the following spell-like
abilities once per day: phantom steed, dust devil, remove fear,
and flame brand. They are excellent riders and can fire missile
weapons from horseback at full gallop with no penalty. Their
tactics revolve around keeping their opponents away from their
herds and the slower members of their groups. If that is unsuc-
cessful they may, in desperation, attempt to stampede the herd
into their opponents. (If a group saving throw versus spell fails
for the herd, the entire herd stampedes as directed).

Habitat/Society: Herdsman tasked genies are more commonly
solitary, though they gather in groups when the size of their
herds requires it. Their lives are completely centered around the
welfare of their herds, and they are entirely willing to disobey
their masters if they are ordered to take a herd into danger or
into unfavorable land where the animals are likely to perish.

Herdsman genies take blood from their charges, which must
be carefully drained so as not to weaken the animal and must be
drunk immediately. They also take the milk and make it into
various fermented drinks, cheeses, curds, and yogurts.

  

 

 

  
 
 
 

" Rea OF,

a7

 

 

 

 

Herdsman tasked genies are very fond of races of all kinds,
and contests are often held within and among groups of herds-
man tasked genies to determine the fastest runner. Some of these
races are made more difficult by following the pack of runners
with a stampeding herd of bulls, camels, or goats. Camel and
horse races are also common, and sports played mounted are
often tumultuous all-day affairs with complex rules and scoring
systems. Wagering and haggling are also favored activities of
the male herdsman tasked genies. Young female herdsman gen-
ies take part in foot races, but they prefer roping, branding,
shearing, and trick riding contests to mounted team sports.

All groups of herdsman genies are extremely mobile. If they
feel threatened, they may stealthily force march their animals an
entire night’s travel across the plains with no ill effect on either
themselves or their animals. They may do this once a week.
This ability requires a cooperating group of genies and cannot
be attempted by a lone herdsman.

Some groups of herdsman tasked genies have adopted the re-
ligions of Zakhara, and, like all new converts, they are zealous
in their faith. These groups will try to convert others they meet,
and they don’t mind if they must force the convert to make up
his mind.

Ecology: Herdsman tasked genies tend to push out both compet-
ing nongenie herdsmen and predators which might threaten
their herds. They know when a given area has been grazed to
the point of temporary exhaustion and will move on, but they
have little regard for the artificial boundaries of sultanates,
sheikdoms, and even the fences of farmers. This unwillingness
to acknowledge the authority of settled groups often leads them
into conflict, although they moderate this tendency if their mas-
ter specifically admonishes them about it.
Genie, Tasked, Slayer

MC13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: High (13-14)
TREASURE: U
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Evil
NO. APPEARING: 1
ARMOR CLASS: -2
MOVEMENT: 24, Fl 30 (B)
HIT DICE: 12
THACO: 9
NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-16/2-16
or by weapon type +9
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 15%

SIZE:
MORALE:
LEVEL/XP VALUE:

L (10’ tall)
Fearless (20)
11,000

The tasked slayer genie’s only purpose is to commit murder as often
as possible—by stealth as long as possible or through berserker
rages when discovered. As this sort of behavior tends to be noticed
by sentient creatures nearby, slayer genies are usually very discreet
about their activities, controlling the rage which motivates them
because of their fear of discovery and punishment.

Slayer genies are massive genies with four arms and dark, pol-
ished skin and are usually naked to the waist. Two of their hands
are human; the other two resemble lion’s paws with ivory claws.
Their red eyes sparkle with flame. Above and between their two
eyes lies a third eye, which is green and resembles that of a panther.
The third eye is centered between two horns. Their hair is coarse as
horsetails. On their backs are two massive wings.

Combat: Slayer genies prefer to kill their targets quietly, and
they are extremely well-equipped to do so, either by magical or
physical means. They can cast blindness, silence 15’ radius,
darkness, improved invisibility, ventriloquism, misdirection,
assume gaseous form, polymorph self, and dimension door. If
they reveal their true form they can cause fear in creatures of 3
Hit Dice or less.

In melee, they attack either with their terrible claws or with a
melee weapon in either normal hand (at no penalty). Their enor-
mous Strength gives them a +9 damage bonus when using me-
lee weapons. Slayer genies prefer scimitars, axes, cleaving
polearms, morning stars, and maces. Slayer genies will use mis-
sile weapons in unusual circumstances. They suffer no penalty
for using such weapons instead of their usual melee weapons.

Habitat/Society: It is believed that slayer genies were first cre-
ated with the specific function of terrifying the enemies of the
genie lords, but that they later began to serve as efficient assas-
sins in noble genies’ power struggles. Given their nature and
their origin, it is not surprising that slayer genies are always ser-
vants. Those few slayer genies that become free generally have
very short reigns of terror. They serve humans, demihumans,
and other genies, but their masters always closely monitor their
actions. An unwatched slayer genie is extremely dangerous, and
may begin slaughtering its master’s followers.

Slayer genies enjoy the company of other warriors, and will
spend hours discussing the advantages and disadvantages of

Wy ALS :
od Ws
SY

 

 

 

—_ a7 Vig a, E §

Aa

various weapons, the fine points of anatomy, and the details of
stealth, tactics, martial trickery, and armor with anyone willing
to listen. Their fascination with violence and bloodshed goes far
beyond the professional level. They have a disturbing fixation
with the process for its own sake, and their descriptions of past
battles are full of loving details of exactly how a foe looked as he
died, how well each of their weapons performed, the quirks of
various fighting styles and their appeal, and so on. The joy they
have in battle and death extends to their own demise, which
they all look forward to as a glorious occasion. Nothing spoils
the mood of a slayer genie quite so much as the thought of dying
some way other than in combat.

Slayer genies know neither shame nor pride when asked to
complete some mission; they merely seek to fulfill their role,
and boast about it afterward. No trick is too cruel, no tactic too
immoral, no job too unsavory for them to undertake.

Ecology: When tasked genies are driven mad they become
tasked slayer genies, genies unable to stay sane after long labor
at the same task. They seek release in bloodshed, and they re-
tain only a limited cunning.

Slayer genies view all other creatures as merely sets of abili-
ties and attributes to be overcome, creatures whose only pur-
pose is to meet their death at the hands of the slayer. Hearing a
slayer genie inform creatures that they are denying their pur-
pose (that is, not dying at its hands), and thus upsetting it, can
be very alarming —refusal to admit that one wants to die by the
slayer’s hands just upsets it further. Living creatures rarely sur-
vive, much less profit, from meeting a slayer genie.

The only exception to this general rule are the undead; slayer
genies are puzzled at whether or not they should bother to kill
things that are already dead. Given a choice, slayer genies al-
ways leave undead creatures for last, and if there is any chance
of discovery, they leave the undead alone. This often results in
undead creatures being blamed and hunted as the perpetrators
of slayer genies’ crimes.
Genie, Tasked, Warmonger

MC13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (15-16)
TREASURE: B
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 4
MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 7

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-10 or by weapon +4
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spells

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Raise morale
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (5’ tall)
MORALE: Fanatical (17-18)
LEVEL/XP VALUE: 1,400

Warmonger genies are strategists and advisers to generals, lay-
ing plans for warfare among the genies’ emirs and caliphs. They
are always found leading soldiers and mercenaries, and where
there is no war for them to fight, they start one.

A hairy genie with blood dripping from every hair, warmon-
ger tasked genies tend to obesity. They are shorter than most
other genies, a fact which causes them no end of anger and frus-
tration. The typical warmonger genie stands 5’ tall and weighs
over 200 pounds.

For battle, warmonger genies wear the heaviest armor they
can find and are generally found at the rear of their troops, ob-
serving from horseback or seated on a ridge overlooking the
field. They are very fond of wearing sashes, medals, clusters of
jewels or precious metal signifying military ranks and orders, as
well as other accessories that attest to their bravery and skill.

Combat: Warmonger genies are capable warriors but excel at
leadership. Their leadership is both so inspired and so terrifying
that troops under their command gain a +2 bonus to their mo-
rale as long as their leader lives. If a tasked warmonger genie is
slain in the heat of battle, all troops aware of his death suffer an
additional -2 penalty to morale. In melee, warmonger genies
prefer weapons for mounted use: maces, picks, and scimitars.
Their great strength gives them a + 4 bonus to weapon damage.
Warmonger genies can use each of the following spell-like
abilities twice per day: cloak of bravery, suggestion, and en-
chanted weapon. They may use fear and remove fear at will.

Habitat/Society: Warmonger genies live among their troops and
worship their lords. They are completely loyal to their cause
and will carry on with battle even if their lord requests they
stop. They will, however, retreat when it is to their advantage,
to renew the battle on more favorable terms.

Generally, warmonger genies are summoned or hired to per-
form a specific task, such as defending a vital pass from immi-
nent invasion or leading forces in a bid for conquest. They are

 

 

LY,

 

 

so enthralled with their work, however, that they often refuse to
stop at the limits that their leaders set. As long as a continued
advance doesn’t overextend supply lines, push exhausted troops
beyond their endurance, or otherwise appear to be militarily
foolish, the genies will urge their lords to continue the fight.
Their reasoning is simple: fighting now will prevent fighting lat-
er. They are also canny enough to play on their lord’s vanity.
They will always assure him that bringing more land under his
rule will serve the interests of others as well because of his en-
lightened and wise policies.

In their hearts, warmonger genies see political figures as fool-
ish and incapable of understanding the glories of soldiering.
Many warmonger genies fancy themselves as profound philoso-
phers; appealing to this conceit often brings respect from the
genie.

Ecology: Warmonger genies have no ecology. They destroy
ecologies they encounter because they must requisition food
and supplies from territories they march through, and they must
allow their troops a certain amount of plunder for morale pur-
poses. Repeated marching over the same territory during an ex-
tended campaign often results in the complete destruction or
removal of any mounts, grain, livestock, water supplies, and
other foodstuffs that the genie’s army can lay its hands on. Non-
combatants starve in their wake.

In addition to their purely strategic and tactical skills, they
are administratively and politically skilled enough to under-
stand how to create a climate of fear and suspicion conducive to
turning entire nations into armed camps. They will ruthlessly
carry out plans to bring all the reins of power under military
control and then make every citizen of their nation as efficient
as possible in contributing to the war effort.

©1992 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Genie, Tasked, Winemaker wae

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Temperate or subtropical
villages and hills

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Omnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)

TREASURE: X,C

ALIGNMENT: Neutral (good tendencies)

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 8

MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 2

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6 or by weapon type

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M

MORALE: Average (8-10)

LEVEL/XP VALUE: 120

Winemaker tasked genies are creatures of the grape, dedicated
to nurturing the vines and extracting the finest possible vintag-
es. They are quiet creatures, tending to their fields and casks
through the summer and winter and closely supervising the har-
vests.

This genie has the head of a cat, the body of a dog, and a long
trunk which it uses to crush grapes. It stands erect, with individ-
uals varying between 4’ and 5’ tall. They weigh about 150
pounds, the males slightly more, the females slightly less.

Winemaker genies do not wear cloth, but they do drape them-
selves in grape leaves during the growing season and are gener-
ally completely covered in grape juice during the harvest. Most
such genies can speak many languages, so as to be able to travel
the widest regions possible.

Combat: Winemaker tasked genies are poor fighters, though
when they are angered their frenzy can be quite frightening to
watch. They use their trunk to catch and crush opponents, caus-
ing 1d6 points of damage.

In addition, winemaker genies can spray their opponents with
wine or other liquids they take into their trunk. This spray fills a
cone 20’ long and 10’ wide at the base; each creature struck by it
must make a saving throw versus paralyzation or be blinded by
the stinging wine for 1d3 rounds. If only water is available to the
genie, the blinding lasts but a single round.

The winemaker tasked genie can use each of the following
spell-like abilities three times per day: water walk (to walk over
the vats while stirring), purify food and water, create water,
goodberry, speak with animals, and detect poison. Once per
week they can cast pass plant (through grapevines only), sun-
shine, and plant growth.

Any fermented beverage or fruit juice made under the direc-
tion of a winemaker genie is held to high standards and is worth
four times what a normal beverage might bring in the market-
place.

 

 

 

 

Ba H-

na piel
*
S

fy
i

eg

ay?

 

Habitat/Society: Winemaker genies are travelers, wandering
from harvest to harvest, never staying at a given vineyard for
more than two years. Harvest time is the only festival time that
winemaker genies celebrate; they are great drinkers and are ca-
pable of entertaining workers with wit, song, and even buffoon-
ery at the genie’s expense.

Unfortunately, a winemaker tasked genie’s taste for his own
work typically leads to excessive drinking and a slow decay of
his skills. Older winemaker genies may become eccentric vint-
ners who cater to jaded palates, or they may become village
drunks, madmen, and fools.

Winemaker genies serve only so long as their masters do not
mistreat them, do not adulterate or water their wines, and do
not ask them to follow any particular method or rule, even the
traditions of the vineyard. They demand complete latitude to
make wine as they think best. The slightest disagreement may
cause them to seek work elsewhere.

Winemaker genies forced to their task are still capable of pro-
ducing excellent wines, but their special touch may be lacking,
and they decline into drunkenness and eccentricity much more
quickly.

Ecology: Winemaker genies get along well with wine snobs,
drunks, satyrs, nymphs, centaurs, and hill giants. They are
friendly to any race that appreciates their talents, and they have
been found working for evil humanoids as well as for enlight-
ened caliphs.
Ghost Mount

MC13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Desert, plains
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night
DIET: Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 5
MOVEMENT: 30

HIT DICE: 3

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-8/1-8/1-6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: L
MORALE: Champion (15-16)
LEVEL/XP VALUE: 420

Ghost mounts are undead creatures which can help desperate or
foolish travelers cover vast distances, but at a price. These
beasts are aptly named, not only for their appearance, but also
because those who ride a ghost mount may themselves become
ghosts, doomed to wandering the deserts by night.

A ghost mount has two forms, its true form and an illusory
one. A ghost mount’s true form is nothing more than a transpar-
ent, glowing outline of its former self (either a horse, a camel, or
possibly even an antelope). It appears to be a malnourished,
battered, and scarred wreck with wild and shining eyes. A ghost
mount can also use powerful illusions to mask its true forms and
appear as a particularly strong and handsome specimen of its
former self.

Combat: A ghost mount can attack physically with its two
hooves and bite, but it usually prefers to allow a rider to mount
it and then seeks to use its life energy draining ability to trans-
form the hapless rider into a ghost.

Any creature that rides a ghost mount must make an ability
check using Wisdom (at a -2 penalty) when the journey begins.
If the check is failed, the mount refuses to obey the rider’s in-
structions and instead takes him deep into the nearest wilderness
at full speed. Leaping from the mount when it is traveling at a
gallop causes 3d6 points of damage, and items falling with the
rider must make a saving throw against crushing blows. If the
rider stays with the ghost mount, it will throw him after travel-
ing at least 75 miles into the wilderness. Being thrown causes
1d6 damage; a saving throw against falling for items carried by
the thrown rider must also be made.

If the initial Wisdom ability check is successful, the ghost
mount obeys, but the rider must then make a saving throw ver-
sus death magic when the journey has reached a middle point.
Failure indicates that the ghost mount’s life energy drain has
transformed the rider into a wraith. Success indicates that the
rider has mastered the ghost mount and may travel with it to his
destination. Once the journey is ended, the rider must set the
ghost mount free, though he may then summon it to service
again whenever he wishes. Later journeys carry the same risks
as the first.

Ghost mounts are unaffected by sleep, charm, hold, death,
and cold-based magic, and they are immune to poison and para-

S ee > XN
SAT TH NN
WY \ Saw ~~S x

 

A gy

-

aN
SY
x
X
Ss
5

 

 

lyzation. A vial of holy water causes 2-8 points of damage to a
ghost mount. A raise dead or resurrection spell will kill a ghost
mount if it fails its saving throw versus spell.

Ghost mounts seem to glide just over the ground without ever
losing their footing, so they always move at their full movement
rate over all forms of terrain. They suffer no penalty due to en-
cumbrance because their undead forms do not suffer from fa-
tigue. They have no need for sleep or rest of any kind. A rider
willing to lash himself to the saddle can use a ghost mount to
travel as much as 180 miles per day over any terrain in any
weather (once control over a ghost mount is established, of
course). A rider may also elect to cover only 90 miles per day
and sleep at night, even if several days travel are required to
reach the destination. During this time, and throughout any
number of stops, the ghost mount will continue to obey its rider.

Habitat/Society: Ghost mounts are formed from the spirits of
mistreated animals, creatures so brutally handled in life that
they survive after death to take vengeance on all creatures who
ride them.

Ghost mounts can be summoned by magic, though their life-
draining abilities are not altered if they are called to serve in this
fashion. If a mount spell is cast in a region of empty, uncivilized
desert or plains, there is a 5% chance that a ghost mount will
answer the magical summons.

Ghost mounts are sometimes found among herds of ordinary
wild animals, covered in their illusory life forms. In this way
they hope to be captured and ridden, thus allowing them to
bring more living creatures into the realm of the undead.

Ecology: Ghost mounts do not live or reproduce in any normal
fashion. When injured, their forms remain marred until they are
repaired by the use of an animate dead spell. The passage of
time also allows them to recover their negative planar energy,
but this form of rejuvenation does not restore their original ap-
pearance.

Riders transformed into wraiths by a ghost mount cannot be
restored to their normal form by any means short of a wish.

©1992 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Ghul, Great

MC13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Desert, mountains
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Pack

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night

DIET: Scavenger
INTELLIGENCE: High (13-14)
TREASURE: C

ALIGNMENT: Neutral Evil
NO. APPEARING: 1-3

ARMOR CLASS: 0

MOVEMENT: 18 (Br 3 or Cl 12)
HIT DICE: 4

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6/1-6/2-12

SPECIAL ATTACKS:
SPECIAL DEFENSES:

Magic use, shapeshifting
Spell immunities,
+1 weapon to hit

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil
SIZE: M (7-10')
MORALE: Average (8-10)

LEVEL/XP VALUE: Common: 1,400
1st- to 4th-level mage: 2,000

5th- to 7th-level mage: 3,000

The great ghuls are undead elemental cousins of the genies, the
most wicked members of an inferior order of jann. They haunt
burial grounds and feed on dead human bodies. They are usu-
ally female, and all great ghuls are beguiling and seductive sha-
pechangers. No matter what form they take, however, their feet
always remain those of a donkey, though they often wear spe-
cial boots or long robes to conceal this aberration. Ghuls delight
in devouring the flesh of their victims and then sucking the mar-
row from the bones.

Great ghuls have thick hair and bushy eyebrows that often
droop over their eyes. Their hands end in clawed fingers, and
their feet and sometimes their ears are those of a donkey. Their
jaws jut out and are powerfully muscled. Their pale white skin
is always cold and clammy, and they have the hunched posture
of their lesser cousins. Great ghuls are aware of how their looks
repulse other creatures and are eager to disguise their true ap-
pearance with cosmetics, clothes, and jewelry. While most great
ghuls stand over 7' tall, those that are mages typically stand
about 10' tall. In their polymorphed form they are often smaller.

Combat: Great ghuls attack with their claws and their powerful
jaws. They can only be struck by magical weapons. Great ghuls
can use each of the following spell-like abilities at will: bestow
invisibility, polymorph self, and shocking grasp.

Like most undead, great ghuls are immune to sleep, charm,
hold, and cold-based magic. They are not affected by paralyza-
tion or poison. Great ghuls can be turned as ghasts, and mage
ghuls are turned as wraiths. They suffer 2-12 points of damage
from holy water, and they suffer a -1 to their attack rolls in
daylight.

Only jann slain by great ghuls become ghuls themselves; all
other races are simply slain and devoured.

About one in every six great ghuls is a mage of up to 7th level
of ability. Great ghuls may even become sha’ir, thus gaining
some measure of power over other genies. Other great ghuls
study the magical provinces of flame, sand, and wind. Ghuls
who study the magic of the sea are extremely rare. All ghuls are
immune to the binding and capturing powers of the sha’ir.

 

LZ
ie

ty
Y,

J tiny
yy Yy
Ly

eas Cae

Maer e a A
Ue WO . a G7
SOS gg OS Wt

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Great ghuls live in seclusion in ruins or caves
found in the emptiest deserts or on the highest mountains. Be-
cause of their sharp claws and incredible strength, great ghuls
from the mountains are able to climb sheer rock walls that
would daunt most mountaineers. Desert ghuls are not as adept
at this, but can dig through sand or soft stones. All ghuls take
only half damage from falls.

Great ghuls are fond of all forms of perfumes and scents, such
as attar of orange, rosewater, cloves, and so on. They use these
to cover their own unpleasant smell.

Great ghul mages are solitary creatures, though other great
ghuls form packs with their siblings (if they have any).

Because great ghuls are feared by humans and despised by
genies, they rarely keep their own form, even when at home in
their lonely caves and ruins. Shapeshifting has become a habit
for the great ghuls, and they are excellent actors and liars. Great
ghuls have many opportunities to practice these deceptions
when they travel among humans. Though solitary, they grow
bored easily, and this seems to motivate them to take part in
pranks and daring deeds that sometimes put them and the secret
of their true identities at considerable risk. Some of their pranks
are less amusing than others: great ghuls are particularly fond of
joining groups of nomads and travelers and then leading them
astray. Many of these travelers are led to their deaths and con-
sumed by the carrion-eating ghuls.

Ecology: Great ghuls serve the genies (when required), but “lord
it” over the ghouls, who are considered unrefined and unrelia-
ble. Great ghuls who become sha’ir are very secretive; the other
genies resent and fear the ghuls’ power over them. Such great
ghuls are often destroyed when their homes are discovered.

In general, all great ghuls avoid contact with other races be-
cause violence often follows. But, they do sometimes help hu-
mans and others who come to them seeking help against other
genies. Sometimes they also help humans in quests which the
great ghuls find interesting, and they do this without expecta-
tion of reward.
Giants, Zakahran— General Information

MC13

 

 

The giants of Zakhara are ancient tribes and races from the ear-
ly days of the world. Although they are respected for their huge
size and strength, they are increasingly outnumbered by the
smaller races, and their cultures have declined from the position
of ruling the most fertile lands to subsisting in the corners of the
world. Most giants accept this change and became enlightened,
but a few still strive to restore their power over the land by forc-
ing smaller races into service.

The giants of the Land of Fate are more civilized and less in-
clined to loutish behavior than other giants. Zakharan giants
are neutral rather than evil; they have their own interests, but
they do not interfere in human affairs. They stay apart from
humans not from boorish unsociability but from a sense of su-
periority to smaller races. The exception is the hill giant race,
which mingles freely with humans. Hill giants even live in har-
mony with other races in many of the great cities. The three sub-
species of Zakharan giants may once have been one race, but
they have been isolated for so long that they rarely meet,
though they are aware of each other’s existence.

Zakharan giants do not just pick up the nearest rock or tree to
use as a weapon —they prefer to use carefully crafted wood and
metal weapons like gigantic bows, tridents, and even lances.
One way to win any giant’s trust is to provide such a weapon.
While they prefer metal weapons, they cannot make them them-
selves from start to finish, because giants are such poor miners.
To get coveted metals and finished weapons, Zakharan giants
resort to many strategies: mercenary work, caravaning across
the deserts, guiding jungle hunts, and diving after sunken trea-
sures. Some giants prefer not to work for their gains; they locate
the metals and take them by force.

The giants of the Land of Fate dress as most civilized people
do, in robes and tunics and turbans made of fine cottons and
silks. Hill giants in Zakhara do not wander the land like fur-clad
barbarians: if they can afford it and have need of it, they wear
armor. Porter and dockworker giants wear what they find de-
cent and comfortable.

Zakharan giants are entirely willing to engage in trade to get
various items such as coffee, cloth, and spices from other races.
In exchange they offer rare furs and jungle flowers, riches from
the sea, and opals or other gemstones taken from the deserts. A
few exceptional giants take their skills to town and set up shop.
Stone giants, for example, may work as master masons, jewel-
ers, or quarrymen, and an occasional fire giant is sometimes
found at the bellows or the hammers in a smithy. Desert and reef
giants live so far from most human haunts that they venture in-
to the great cities rarely, and when they do they generally re-
main in the sug or the bazaar. Generally only hill giants will
truly adapt to city life.

This willingness to engage in trade has resulted in considera-
ble skill with languages for the Zakharan giants. Every giant
knows his own dialect, the trade tongue of the giants, the com-
mon tongue, and 1d4 additional languages. The giantish lan-
guages are sometimes spoken fluently among nearby humans.

Although they are refined, Zakharan giants are also haughty.
They are quick to command obedience from those they deem
inferior, but they are also quick to acknowledge skill and merit.
In a few cases, the giants have managed to impose their rule on
entire tribes or towns of humans and other creatures, usually
through slow and subtle means. Because of their relatively small
numbers, giants might initially hire on as mercenaries or hunt-
ing partners; but over time they expand their sphere of com-
mand to other areas, preferably those of justice, trade, and
minting coinage. Giant rulers are only common on the fringes of
civilization and in backwater remnants of old empires or trading
routes,

Zakharan giants live much longer than humans, with a gener-
ation varying from 60 to 100 years and individuals living 200 to

600 years. Children are treasured in giantish society, and all gi-
ants in a clan contribute to the upbringing of the young. Strik-
ing a child is a serious offense, and any mistreatment of children
(one’s own or the children of others) brings down the wrath of
the clan on the perpetrator.

Zakharan giants have written traditions of poetry and schol-
arship. Desert and reef giants are the most literate, and the work
of their historians and scholars is valued by humans because of
its overview of long time periods.

All the giants of Zakhara are traditionalists: they believe that
there are proper ways of doing everything, whether it be brew-
ing tea, curing meat, negotiating a contract, or preparing a des-
ert clan for battle. Not following giantish protocol is a serious
breach of etiquette and often results in violent punishment or
expulsion from the company of the giants, depending on the se-
verity of the offense. Zakharan giants refuse to be rushed in
anything, and they are supremely confident that their time-
honored methods are the best. Their scholarship is influenced
by this tendency as well, with the result that it can be called
plodding and reactionary. Giants look to the past more than
they look to the future.

Priests and Mages

Because the Zakharan giants are more literate and refined
than their cousins elsewhere, all adult giants of the three
Zakharan sub-species may become priests or mages. Any given
giant has a 25% chance of being a priest or a mage, with an
equal chance for either class. Giants may reach up to 9th level of
ability as priests and 11th level as mages. Giant priests tend to
be ethoists or moralists, though some are mystics. Giant mages
cannot be sha’ir, though they may be elementalists or sorcerers.
For each level of ability a giant spell-caster gains, he also gains
an additional 3 hit points.

Giants and Genies

Giants and genies do not always get along, as genies refuse to
recognize the power of the giants and their superior traditions,
and giants refuse to give the genies tribute or sacrifice; neither
will the giants acknowledge the genies as superior beings. The
clash of these two proud groups has perhaps been responsible
for the slow decline of the giants, though neither giants nor gen-
ies talk much of the other. The two groups never cooperate.

Giantish Law and Punishment

Giants operate their legal affairs in their own communities by
an ancient code of law that emphasizes taking back from the
lawbreaker what was lost due to his crime. Theft, extortion, and
even assault are judged with considerable mercy: criminals are
forced to return property and sometimes forced to enter inden-
tured servitude to restore the original way of things. In cases of
murder, child abuse, treachery, and rape, where it is impossible
to make amends, giantish law calls for branding and exile rather
than death.

Giantish law is especially harsh on those who might expect to
be least affected by it: nongiants. For reasons of racial pride in
their past, all giants consider their code of law and their judges
to be far above the primitive, upstart laws of other races. Crea-
tures brought before a giantish court (for flouting protocol, for
example) may not appeal to their own legal system. In this, the
giants of the Burning World are unrepentant, and they insist
that they are doing the world a favor by spreading their code
throughout the land. In communities where giants live with hu-
mans, they abide by human laws, though they make their mis-
givings about it plain.

©1992 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Giant, Desert

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Desert
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Tribal
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: B
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 2-20
ARMOR CLASS: 1
MOVEMENT: 15

HIT DICE: 13

THACO: 7

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-10 or by weapon (2-12 +7)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Hurling spears
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Camouflage
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: H (17' tall)
MORALE: Elite (14)
LEVEL/XP VALUE: 5,000

Desert giants were once numerous in the scrub plains and des-
erts of the Land of Fate, but they have fallen victim to a divine
curse which transforms them slowly but inexorably into stone.
They always wander the land in the company of their cattle and
their mounts. Their great civilization has long since vanished
under the sands.

The weathered and craggy faces of the desert giants are scored
with wrinkles. Even the youngest of desert giants are somewhat
wrinkled, though this is not visible in the women, as they wear
the veil. The dark hair and swarthy skin of the desert giants
make their blue eyes all the more remarkable. However, it is
considered a clear sign of impending fossilization when the eyes
of a desert giant turn from blue to brown. The typical desert
giant is 17’ tall and weighs 7,000 pounds, though fossilizing gi-
ants may weigh twice that. Desert giants may live to be 400
years old.

Combat: Desert giants fight mounted when they can, though
steeds of a size to suit them are rare. Battle mounts include gi-
gantic lizards, enormous insects, huge undead horses of shifting
bone, and even rocs. In the past, some desert giants took service
as bodyguards and mercenaries with the most powerful of sul-
tans. The sight of a squad of desert giants wheeling about in
preparation for a charge has caused more than one desert legion
to break and run.

Desert giants do not hurl rocks. Indeed, they wander many
areas where there is often no ready supply of boulders, and car-
rying such heavy objects would tire even the strongest nomadic
giant. However, they do make large throwing spears from wood
they find when they pass near jungle lands. These spears are
kept and cherished as heirlooms over generations. The spears
have a range of 3/6/9 and cause 2-12 + 7 points of damage. Des-
ert giant chieftains sometimes carry great scimitars given to
their ancestors for outstanding military service. These weapons
cause 2-16 + 7 when wielded by anyone with a Strength of 19 or
better. On occasion, a desert giant will attack with one of its
huge fists, causing 1-10 points damage on a successful attack

Some desert giants are gifted with the ability to call back their
ancestors from the stones; they are called sand-shifters because
of the way the summoned giants throw aside the sands when
they rise again. Sand-shifters are not priests or mages; they have
no other special spell abilities. One in every ten desert giants can

MC13

 

 

 

 

bring back giants who have assumed the form of stone and can
command them to fight once more. Once per week, a desert gi-
ant can summon 1-6 giants from the rocks for 2-12 turns; the
summoning takes one turn. These giants crumble back to rock
and powder when slain. Desert giant children gifted this way
can summon 2-20 stony mounts for their elders to ride into bat-
tle. Adult sand-shifters can summon 3-30 mounts instead of 1-6
giants if they so choose.

Desert giants’ skin is so similar to sand and rock that they can
camouflage themselves very effectively if given one turn to pre-
pare. This ability allows them to ambush foes and prey alike.
(Desert giants who lose their herds often use this ability to be-
come effective bandits, and the numbers of these gigantic brig-
ands have increased as the race dwindles.) A giant so
camouflaged increases chances of a surprise attack to 1-4 ona

d10 and decreases the chance of being seen by search parties or
soldiers to 1 in 10.

Habitat/Society: Desert giants are nomadic herdsmen and are
rarely found far from their herds. Though they are responsible
for stripping entire river valleys bare in fertile areas, they do not
reimburse farmers or herdsmen on the edge of those territories
for any damage they might do. They see the lands as theirs for
the taking, and they make no apology for overgrazing or even
for grazing their herds on crops. Few sultanates attempt to force
them off cropland; most attempt to lure the desert giants away
with promises of employment as mercenaries. Some will prom-
ise rich gifts of salt, cloth, spices, and metal if only the desert
giants will return to the empty quarters of the desert.

Ecology: Desert giants wander hundreds of miles following the
rains with their herds. When the rains fail, the scrub withers,
and the herds and their giants starve. At these times young
males among the desert giants may take up mercenary work and
use the money they obtain to support the entire tribe. If a
drought goes on for years, more and more giants are driven into
the cities, though their absolute numbers are still tiny compared
to the numbers of humans and other smaller races.
Giant, Jungle

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical/jungle
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Tribal/ cooperative
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average to High (8-14)
TREASURE: QO (A)

ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1 or 1-6

ARMOR CLASS: 3

MOVEMENT: 15, C16

HIT DICE: 11

THACO: 9

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1or2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-16 +9 or 2-12 +9/2-12 +9

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Surprise, arrows

 

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: H (18' tall)
MORALE: Champion (16)
LEVEL/XP VALUE: 6,000

Powerful, lanky, and strictly carnivorous, jungle giants are a
terror to all the animals of the tropical forests. They are great
hunters and stalkers, able to clear a huge tract of forest of all
game and then move on.

A typical jungle giant stands 18' tall yet weighs only 3,000
pounds—very thin for a giant. Females are generally taller than
males. They can live to be 200 years old.

Jungle giants always carry everything they need with them:
tools for making and maintaining their weapons, fire-starters,
tinder, and spare bits of leather and sinew used to repair cloth-
ing. They also carry their valuables, and every adult jungle gi-
ant carries a quiver of arrows.

Jungle giants speak their own language and the languages of
tribes of nearby humans and humanoids.

Thin and very tall, jungle giants easily blend into the vertical
landscape of the tropical forest. Their wavy hair is pale green,
and their skin is a rich muddy yellow, like sunlight on the forest
floor. They rarely wear more clothing than strictly necessary, as
they prefer complete freedom of movement when hunting.
Many groups of jungle giants use ritual tattooing, colorful
feather headdresses, and even filed teeth to show their fierce-
ness. They sometimes decorate themselves with mud, sticks,
and leaves when stalking especially large or wary game.

Combat: Jungle giants use 15' long bows crafted to take advan-
tage of their tremendous size and strength. These giants are very
quick with their huge bows and can fire two arrows each round.
They will use poisoned arrows to bring down their prey more
quickly. If these arrows are used in combat, opponents must
save vs. paralyzation at -2 or be rendered immobile for 2-12
turns. Even humanoid creatures with the strength to pull a jun-
gle giant bow cannot use it, because the arrows are over 6' long
(2d6 + 9 damage). Jungle giants will occasionally use the trunk
of a dead tree as a club, doing 2d8 +9 points damage.

Jungle giants prefer to take their prey from ambushes, firing
their bows from the treetops and then swinging down sturdy
branches or thick ropes to finish off their prey. Camouflaged gi-
ants cause a -1 penalty on opponents’ surprise rolls. When set-
ting up a blind, they can camouflage themselves in jungle terrain
with a 60% chance of success. Setting up a blind or decorating
themselves with jungle camouflage takes three turns.

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Jungle giants are friendlier than most other
races of giant-kind, and they will often cooperate with human
jungle tribes on hunts. The giants provide strength and raw
power, and the humans provide the numbers and skill to drive
animals into ambushes.

Jungle giants have absolutely no compunctions about eating
any form of meat—mammal, reptile, amphibian, or avian.
They know how to stalk, kill, and prepare everything from eggs
to full-grown animals, and from scavengers to predators. Their
villages reflect this carnivorous tendency; the huts are made
from wooden posts with roofs of greased animal hides stitched
together with intestines. The smell of smoking meats and butch-
ery hang in the air, and huge quantities of dragonflies and other
insects swarm around the villages. A jungle giant village is 50%
likely to shelter 1-6 giant dragonflies.

Ecology: Jungle giants think of most creatures as prey, but those
they accept as fellow hunters they respect as equals, regardless
of their size. Although they much prefer the jungle terrain they
know so well, they are often forced to leave the trees for the
savanna when their numbers become too great to survive in the
jungle. They think nothing of eating every snake, antelope, cat,
warthog, ostrich, and elephant they come across. Jungle giants
on the savannah often return to the forest, because their great
height makes stealthy hunting difficult for them on open
ground.

©1992 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Giant, Reef

MC13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical or subtropical ocean/reef
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)
TREASURE: Z (A)
ALIGNMENT: Neutral good

NO. APPEARING: 1 or 1-4

ARMOR CLASS: O or -4
MOVEMENT: 15, Sw 12

HIT DICE: 18

THACO: 5

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-10 or by weapon

(typically 2-20 + 10)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Boulders, whirlpool
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Immune to water-based attacks

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: H (16’ tall)
MORALE: Fanatic (17)
LEVEL/XP VALUE: 12,000

 

Reef giants are the loners of giant-kind, although they often live
in remarkably well-appointed mansions that seem to be no more
than huts from the outside. They sometimes become sailors, but
their huge mass limits them to the largest of vessels. Reef giants
are typically 16’ tall and weigh 4,000 pounds. Reef giants can
live to be 600 years old.

Reef giants speak their own language as well as the giantish
trade tongue and the languages of storm and cloud giants. In
addition, 40% of the giants also speak the common tongue.

Reef giants have burnished coppery skin and pale white hair.
They are barrel-chested and powerfully-muscled from the exer-
tion of forcing their huge bodies through water. Reef giants have
a Strength of 22. Reef giants wear skins or garments made of
braided hair when ashore, but swim wearing no more than a
belt for knives and pouches.

Combat: Reef giants prefer to fight in or under water, and they
are fierce fighters when angered. They suffer no penalties when
fighting in or under water. They cannot be harmed by water- or
ice-based attack forms. They typically attack with giant tridents
for 2-20 +10 points of damage, but have been known to lash
out with a huge fist (1d10 points damage) now and again.

Once per day, a reef giant can form a whirlpool. Unless a suc-
cessful Strength ability check is made, creatures within 10 yards
of the giant are sucked into the whirlpool and suffer 2-16 points
of battering damage plus 2-20 points drowning and choking
damage (unless the creatures are able to breathe water, in which
case only the battering damage applies). The whirlpool is not
powerful enough to draw in ships.

Reef giants can throw boulders up to 350 yards for 3-30
(3d10) points of damage. They prefer to use thrown boulders to
sink unwelcome ships. Boulders are not used against individual
opponents.

Habitat/Society: Reef giants are often solitary for long periods
of time, although they mate for life. When their children reach
puberty, they are sent out on their own to seek an island or reef
habitat to make their home.

 

The mansions of reef giants are sometimes built into the hills
and gorges of the islands, and they are always stocked with fur-
niture and decorations collected over generations. These man-
sions are passed on from one giant to another; the eldest
daughter is generally reared to provide for her parents as they
grow old and is usually given the mansion and all its goods upon
their death. These well-dowried daughters are the objects of
much competition between reef giant suitors, each of whom
seeks to both prove himself to the new mistress of the mansion
and undo his competitors by any means available. Diving, surf-
ing, and fishing competitions are common in reef giant court-
ship.

Ecology: Reef giants are scavengers who fish and forage coral
reefs for a hundred different sources of food. They can net entire
schools of fish, and as accomplished divers they can retrieve
hoards of pearls, sponges, and coral. Their enormous strength
allows them to swim for hours at a time without tiring. In this
way reef giants can amass huge amounts of goods to trade for
other items.

Some reef giants keep flocks of goats or sheep on their island
homes, but these giants are generally elderly and not as capable
of foraging successfully.

Reef giants frequently enter into contracts or trade agree-
ments with humans and other mercantile races. In exchange for
pearls and other valuables from the sea, they are given cloth,
sweets, and metal goods.

The reef giants' willingness to plunder the sea has made them
the enemies of Zakharan merfolk, tritons, and other ocean-
dwelling races.
Hama

MC13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: None
INTELLIGENCE: Low to Very (5-12)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Any

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 2 (7)
MOVEMENT: 1, F130

HIT DICE: 1

THACO: 20

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-3/1-3
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Fear
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Immaterial
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: S
MORALE: Average (8-10)
LEVEL/XP VALUE: 120

Hama are spirit birds formed when the soul rises from the body
in bird-form upon a person’s death. This spirit bird normally
then leaves the Prime Material Plane and makes its journey to
the afterlife. Those who die by violence or with some important
duty unfulfilled leave their hama tethered to the Prime Material
Plane, seeking to right things before they leave.

Hama are unable to communicate with speech, but their
songs and croakings sometimes offer clues to what they are
seeking to accomplish before they pass on. A speak with ani-
mals spell is not effective in attempting to speak with a hama,
though fongues is. A hama can understand all forms of speech.

The two most common forms of the hama are the owl and the
eagle, but other bird forms are also possible. Sparrow, nightin-
gale, parrot, falcon, peacock, and even vulture hama have been
seen, and the form of a hama invariably reflects the alignment
and personality of the soul that formed it. By day, hama appear
to be ordinary members of their various species, though they
may exhibit behavior unusual for their respective species. By
night, hama are almost always semi-transparent, and their faint
ghostly glow distinguishes them from other birds. Their eyes are
full of bright fire.

Combat: Hama attack in a flurry of wispy claws, beaks, and
wings, for a total of two effective attacks per round. The spirit
forms of hama are difficult to hurt because they are only partial-
ly tethered to the Prime Material Plane, thus giving them AC 2.
On the Ethereal plane, however, hama are AC 7.

In some ways, hama are similar to ghosts. Seeing one requires
a morale check for henchmen and hirelings, and those who fail
flee the area as if affected by a fear spell.

By concentrating, a hama may make its form immaterial, al-
lowing it to pass through walls and other obstacles. It may do
this three times per day, with each instance lasting as long as the
hama can maintain its concentration. It may fly while concen-
trating, but any successful attack on the spirit bird disrupts its
concentration and makes achieving its immaterial form impos-
sible that round.

 

 

 

 

Hama rarely leave the area in which they are encountered.
And, for purposes of turning by clerics, hama are considered
lingering spirits rather than undead (they have no connection to
the Negative Material Plane). Thus, they cannot be turned.

Habitat/Society: Hama are always solitary and always driven to
accomplish some task, usually simple vengeance. There have
been cases of hama who await the arrival of a beloved, the re-
turn of something that they have lost, or the proper disposal of
an estate or inheritance; some simply watch over and protect
children they could not bear to leave. The tasks that hold a spirit
bird to the world are broad, but in most cases they are centered
around a specific person or location.

Helping a good hama accomplish its task may result in the
granting of a gift to the helpful party. A hama is always recog-
nized as a spirit by hakima and mystics, and a hama may make
it plain to such priests that it owes a debt of gratitude to some-
one. The help that the priests may render on the hama’s behalf
varies from good advice to restorative spells. In some cases, a
hama may even delay its departure to the outer planes by sev-
eral days to repay its obligation. In this case the hama may carry
messages, act as a scout or lookout, or perform stunts to im-
press audiences on its benefactor’s behalf.

Ecology: After their task is accomplished, hama depart for their
final reward on the outer planes. Until then they only react to
creatures related to their final tasks or creatures able to assist
them with their goals.

©1992 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Heway

MC13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Desert oases
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Dawn and dusk
DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1-2
ARMOR CLASS: 7
MOVEMENT: 12, Sw 6
HIT DICE: 1+3
THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-3

SPECIAL ATTACKS:
SPECIAL DEFENSES:

Poison, hypnotic stare
Poison skin

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (12’ long)
MORALE: Unsteady (5-7)
LEVEL/XP VALUE: 175

 

The heway is a large white snake with a deadly stare, a creature
of the desert that enjoys poisoning wells and oases. It is hated
and feared by other desert creatures, and desert tribesmen and
others who depend on pure oasis water will kill heway on sight
(with missile weapons so as to avoid being trapped by its stare).

Unlike the dry, scaly skin of most snakes, the heway has
slimy, poison-coated scales that it sheds constantly. Its eyes are
large because it only hunts by dim light; it has large pits on its
snout that serve to detect heat, aiding it in nocturnal scaveng-
ing. A heway also has a very acute sense of smell, and its tongue
can sense water from as far as 20 miles upwind. This allows the
heway to orient itself to likely hunting grounds.

Combat: The heway is a cowardly animal and only fights when
cornered. It prefers weakened prey, though if it is starving, it
can stalk healthy animals. Its primary attack form is its ability
to poison fresh water.

When it arrives at a well or oasis, the heway crawls in and
swims around for several hours, slowing releasing its poison in-
to every portion of the water. When the water is poisoned, any
creature drinking from it must save versus poison at +2 or suf-
fer 30 points damage within 3d6 minutes and be paralyzed for
1d6 hours. Creatures that make their save suffer 15 points of
damage. Even animals that survive the initial effects are often
doomed, as they must somehow reach another water source in
their weakened state or die of dehydration. The snake is im-
mune to the effects of its own poison.

The stare of the heway has a powerful hypnotic effect on its
prey; any creature failing a saving throw vs. paralyzation will
follow the heway to its lair and allow itself to be devoured. The
heway sometimes uses this stare simply to immobilize a menac-
ing creature. It then leaves the area while the hypnotized crea-
ture remains stationary for 1d6 turns.

Curiously, the heway does not have a venomous bite, and its
jaws are weak. It will only take small, hypnotized game when
poisoned prey is unavailable. Its poison is only excreted through
the skin. Merely touching the skin of a heway has no poisonous
effect; the poison must be ingested.

Habitat/Society: The lair of a heway is only large enough to ac-
commodate the snake itself and perhaps one carcass. A cunning

 

ee pes
Seng eleces ERRRS Racy bf ‘I?
ta

 

 

 

 

heway sometimes learns to poison a well, drag a large animal
back to its lair, consume it, and then wait and digest until the
well becomes drinkable again. Then it sallies forth to poison the
well once more. It continues this trick as long as its lair remains
undiscovered. If it requires additional food between poisonings,
it may use its stare on small prey.

The heway avoids others of its kind except once a year, dur-
ing the mating season. After the winter rains have come, the
heway travel to ancestral spawning grounds in the deep desert.
The young hatchlings are left to fend for themselves; the strong-
est devour the rest in order to survive and then crawl off in
search of water.

Ecology: The heway is an opportunistic animal—it comes to a
well, poisons it, and then waits for animals to drink and die be-
fore it attempts to feed. It doesn’t mind sharing its kills with
jackals or other scavengers; a poisoned well usually results in
plenty of meat for all the animals. A heway is most vulnerable
during its overland journeys between wells, so it usually makes
these trips by night.

Other animals, especially herd animals, will kill a heway by
trampling it if they can catch it out in the open during daylight.
Predators like hyena and great cats generally leave the area, as
they can only hope to kill the snake with their claws; predators
that bite a heway often don’t survive.

The heway is occasionally hunted by unscrupulous tribes
which use it to poison the waterholes of their enemies. Since its
stare makes it dangerous even when caged, dead snakes are usu-
ally used for this purpose. In this case, the poison is at half
strength and saves are made at twice the usual bonus (+4).

Poisoned bodies of water become drinkable up to 2d6 days
after the snake is removed, depending on how quickly the water
replenishes itself. A small, quickly evaporating oasis fed by an
underground spring may be drinkable within two days, while a
well which is not often used (and where the water is not fre-
quently recirculated) might take two weeks.
Living Idol

MC13

 

 

 

 

 

 

Animal Death Elemental Healing
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any Any Any Any
FREQUENCY: Very rare Very rare Very rare Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary Solitary Solitary Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any An Any Any
DIET: Sacrifices Sacrifices Sacrifices Sacrifices
INTELLIGENCE: Semi (2-4) Semi (2-4) Semi (2-4) Semi (2-4)
TREASURE: Incidental Incidental Incidental Incidental
ALIGNMENT: LN NE CN NG
NO. APPEARING: 1 1 1 1
ARMOR CLASS: 4 4 4 4
MOVEMENT: 6 3 Nil 3
HIT DICE: 9 16 12 12
THACO: 3 3 3 3
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 1 1 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 4-32 4-32 4-32 4-32
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Charm Charm Charm Charm

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Immune to most spells,

+3 or better weapon

Immune to most spells,
+3 or better weapon

Immune to most spells,
+3 or better weapon

Immune to most spells,
+3 or better weapon

 

to hit to hit to hit to hit
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil Nil Nil Nil
SIZE: L (10-12' tall) L (10-12' tall) L (10-12' tall) L (10-12' tall)
MORALE: Fearless (20) Fearless (20) Fearless (20) Fearless (20)

LEVEL/XP VALUE: 9,000 16,000

Living idols are moving stone statues, each with one particular
power and defense. The remnants of ancient, forgotten empires
and religions, they often inspire strange cults which are opposed
by even the most pragmatic of modern faiths.

Living idols appear to be very large stone statues. They can be
of any shape, either monster, animal, human, or demihuman.
One feature common to all of them is their incredible age. All
show signs of heavy weathering and erosion, their once smooth
surface riddled with small cracks, pock marks, and holes. Some
living idols are no longer completely intact, missing an arm, leg,
or other appendage. A few are so ancient as to be little more
than weathered standing stones.

The magic of these idols is so strong that it is not dispelled
until the entire statue is reduced to small fragments. Until that
time, the largest surviving chunk retains the enchantment.

Idols with two or more appendages still intact are capable of
moving at a rate of 6; those with one appendage drag them-
selves along at a rate of 3. Depending upon the amount of decay,
an idol will have from 9 Hit Dice (a featureless hunk of rock) to
18 Hit Dice (hardly affected by the ravages of time).

Living idols exist for one purpose and that is to be worshipped as
a deity in their own right. They draw power from the number of
sacrifices made in their honor and can perform a potentially benefi-
cial side effect in return for a weekly sacrifice. The nature of the
beneficial power and sacrifice varies, however; the idols with the
most beneficial powers require the most costly sacrifices.

All living idols can communicate using empathy. They make
it immediately clear to worshippers whether or not they find a
particular sacrifice pleasing and appropriate.

Combat: While not entirely sentient, all living idols are imbued
with a strong instinct for self-preservation and have several
powerful mechanisms to help insure their survival.

Living idols are immune to any weapon of less than a +3 or
better enchantment. Most spells have absolutely no effect on a
living idol, with the following exceptions: rock to mud inflicts 6-
36 points of damage (the idol is entitled a save for half damage);
the reverse of the spell, mud to rock, restores 6-36 points of
damage and may (50% chance) regenerate a lost limb, provided

12,000 12,000

 

Ss mas .
Ki es
AN SAR
a SY’
“ > 4

NS

itt LMS a”
aes
_—

 

 

 

 

one is missing; stone to flesh makes the idol vulnerable to any
normal attack or damage-inflicting spell for a single round; dis-
integrate inflicts 10-100 points of damage on the idol (no save).

All living idols must consume at least one sacrifice a week in
order to be satisfied. So long as the weekly sacrifice is main-
tained, the powerful magic of these enchanted statues has a side
effect on the surrounding area unique to each individual living
statue. In addition to the weekly sacrifice, another is required in

©1992 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Living Idol

MC13

 

order for the idol to perform its major power (see the sample
idols below for examples).

Living idols can also charm creatures that approach nearby,
although the manner in which the enchantment is administered
may vary (see the sample idols section below). If the idol is at-
tended by a cult and has been nourished by frequent sacrifices,
targets of the charm receive a -4 penalty on their saves (in addi-
tion to any penalties described below).

Finally, if physically threatened, living idols can physically at-
tack if they possess at least one appendage. They can deliver a
crushing blow each round with their stony fist or claw, inflicting
4-32 points of damage. Living idols fight as automatons, with
little strategy beyond eliminating any opponents capable of
harming them.

Sample idols and their cults

Long-forgotten, ancient religions are thought to be responsi-
ble for the creation of living idols. Now these religions are re-
duced to small cults, existing only because of the idols’ ability to
charm. passers-by.

In the most general of terms, cults are known to worship ei-
ther animals, death, elemental forces, or healing. The DM
should feel free to create personalized cults for his campaign.

Animal Cults

These cults are centered around an animal-shaped living idol,
usually a common pest or vermin, such as the rat or scorpion.
The alignment of these idols is strictly lawful neutral, and they
typically charm any creature who approaches within 100', com-
pelling the being to join in its worship. These idols require a
small and slightly valuable sacrifice of gold, gems, or jewelry
(usually of no more than 25 gp value).

The side effect is an aura of protection against the type of ani-
mal depicted by the idol; for instance, a scorpion idol radiates a
protection from scorpions aura in up to a one-mile radius. The
major power also relates to the type of animal depicted by the
idol; for instance, a rat idol will cure disease. Living animal
idols cannot perform their major power more than once per day.

These are perhaps the most common of living idols, fostering
small- to medium-sized cults of 20-200 worshipers. They are
strictly a local phenomena, at most the hushed secret of a small,
desert village. Since the idol’s charmed worshippers accurately
believe that the idol is protecting them from a particular type of
animal or vermin, they will protect the idol at every opportuni-
ty and violently oppose any who seek to destroy it. The major
power of the idol is thought to be a sacred boon to the village or
congregation, not to be shared with outsiders or nonbelievers.

Death Cults

These cults are centered around a horrible and grotesque idol,
usually in the form of a man-eating monster (a great ghul or
silat) or undead skeleton. The alignment of these idols is neutral
evil. They only charm creatures that physically touch them, al-
though the mind control exerted by these idols is extremely
strong (save at -4). Charmed beings will serve the idol and seek
out human and demihuman victims to add to the cult. At least
once per week, an outsider will be sacrificed to the idol. A low-
ranking member of the cult may be sacrificed instead.

The side effect of joining the cult is that all members cease
aging for as long as the idol is satisfied. The major power of
these idols is to endow the cult “priest” with the ability to cast a
powerful necromantic spell once per week (either resurrection,
regeneration, or restoration, or their reverse). Typically, a death
cult’s “priest” will be the highest-ranking cult member and is not
necessarily a cleric.

The death cults are universally hated and feared by civilized
Zakharans. Organized religions and local rulers seek to stamp
them out whenever they surface. As a result, these cults are now

restricted to the wilderness of Zakhara, where the cults can op-
erate with impunity, gathering victims through planned raids on
caravans, isolated villages, and wandering tribes. Large, estab-
lished death cults (200-500 + members) tend to attract sentient
undead, especially vampires. These quickly rise to the “priest”
position within the cult and use cult members to feed their own,
and the idol’s, appetites.

Elemental Cults

These cults are centered around a living idol crafted in the
shape of a faceless man. The alignment of these idols is chaotic
neutral. Using their empathic ability to screen the emotions of
all creatures who approach within 30', these idols will attempt
to charm (save at -2) only those beings fostering an intent to
harm or destroy them. The substance of the sacrifice (100 gp
value) and the idol’s protective side effect (which covers the area
in a one-mile radius surrounding the statue) depends on the ele-
ment represented by the idol.

Element Sacrifice Aura of protection from:
Earth Gems Earthquakes

Fire Rare woods Uncontrolled fires

Water Aromatic oils Tidal waves and flooding
Air Exotic perfumes Whirlwinds and sandstorms

The major power of these statues is to summon a 12 HD ele-
mental of the appropriate type from the inner planes, one per
week, to perform a specific task for the individual who made the
sacrifice. (There is no chance of the summoned elemental turn-
ing on the summoner.) Refer to the “Elemental” entry in MC1
for more details about elementals.

These types of living idols do not generate charmed cults, but
are catalysts for chaos in the society around them. Desert
sheiks, for instance, have been known to fight over a particular
elemental idol for generations. Elemental wizards are drawn to
these idols like iron filings to a magnet, seeking to destroy them.
(They are interested in keeping a monopoly on controlling the
elements; these idols are a threat to that goal.)

Healing Cults

These cults seek to promote healing and growth. The idols
themselves are neutral good, representing a kind, gentle figure;
statues of young girls and old men are the most common. Like
the elemental idols, these will only attempt to charm (save at
-2) those beings fostering harmful or destructive intentions.
These idols thrive on a sacrifice of beauty, praise, and thanks-
giving, feeding on the positive energy generated in worship.

As a side effect, these statues radiate protection from evil ina
100' radius. The maiden statues are known to heal, while the old
men statues can control weather. (Usually this power is used to
summon rain in times of drought.) A living idol of this type can
perform its major ability once per day.

Ecology: Living idols have no function or role on Zakharan so-
ciety and ecology outside the cults and social disruption they
often inspire. Living idols are considered savage and unenlight-
ened by most Zakharans. Even the kahin, who draw their
power from the oldest of idol-worshipping faiths, usually con-
sider worshipping a living idol anachronistic or outmoded. Al-
most all modern religions despise living idols for their
mind-controlling ability, which is antithetical to most organized
religions in Zakhara. Moralist and ethoist priests will seek to
destroy the idols at every opportunity, though a pragmatic
priest might see the benefits of the healing idols.

Although many priests like to foster the image that living
idols are very rare, nomads tell a completely different story. The
nomads sometimes discover them in abandoned ruins, recently
uncovered by a sandstorm. Most believe many more living idols
are still buried beneath the desert’s shifting sands.
Lycanthrope, Werehyena MCI

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical/Deserts and plains
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Pack

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Scavenger
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)
TREASURE: Ox10 each
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil

NO. APPEARING: 2-12

ARMOR CLASS: 5

MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 5+1

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-12 or by weapon

SPECIAL ATTACKS:
SPECIAL DEFENSES:

See below

Iron or +1 weapon to hit,
immune to enchantment/
charm spells

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE:
SIZE:

MORALE:

LEVEL/XP VALUE:

Nil

M (5-6’ tall)
Average (8-10)
1,400

Werehyenas are humans, usually male, who can transform
themselves into hyenalike forms. Their packs roam the plains
and deserts of Zakhara looking for prey.

The human form tends to be tall and sinewy, with long, shag-
gy hair usually tied back over their neck. The long hair conceals
a second mouth at the base of the head, which mimics the lip
movements of the primary mouth but makes no sound. They
take great pains to keep this second mouth hidden. In their hu-
man forms, werehyenas tend to be gregarious and charismatic,
many possessing a loud, resounding laugh.

The canine form appears to be a large hyena, over 6’ long
from snout to tail, with golden fur on its back and black fur on
its belly and feet. While in this form, they can pass without
trace.

It is not uncommon for a pack of these creatures to be fol-
lowed by 2-12 normal hyenas. The normal hyenas are attracted
to the lycanthropes, although not under their direct control.

Combat: In its human form, a werehyena will attack with a
weapon appropriate for its assumed identity. However, in this
form, a werehyena’s best weapon is its charming personality,
which it uses to gain others’ confidence. Once per round, at will,
a werehyena can bring into effect a friends spell (assume that it
has a Charisma of 14-15 before the spell is cast) as if the spell
were cast by a 12th-level wizard. This spell-like ability is not
memorized or learned; it comes naturally to the creature and is
triggered by thought.

In its hyena form, a werehyena attacks with its vicious bite,
which inflicts 2-12 points of damage. On a natural attack roll of
19 or 20, the werehyena has locked its jaws on a victim. This has
two effects: first, the victim will be automatically subject to
damage from a bite attack on subsequent rounds (no further at-
tack rolls needed for the werehyena); second, the weight of the
creature will slow the victim down, reducing his or her move-
ment rate by 6 (cumulative). After it has locked its jaws on a
victim, a werehyena will release its bite only after suffering
more than 10 points of damage.

In either of its forms, a werehyena can only be affected by
magical or iron weapons. Other types of weapons initially ap-

 

 

 

 

 

pear to inflict damage, but the wound closes by the end of the
round. Werehyenas are immune to enchantment/charm spells.

All werehyenas have a primal fear of fire, preferring to make
appearances and attacks during the day. A flaming torch is
enough to keep one at bay; over six points of fire damage will
send one howling off into the wilderness. If cornered by fire,
however, they will fight to defend themselves.

Habitat/Society: Werehyenas travel in close-knit packs of up to
a dozen creatures, most of whom are males. The pack is run by
a dominant male, who makes all important decisions, reinforc-
ing them with an occasional, savage bite. Newly infected lycan-
thropes are welcomed into a pack only if the newcomer agrees
to accept the pack leader’s orders to the death. If not, a fight for
dominance usually ensues, with the victor becoming the new
pack leader.

Among themselves, they can be playful and capable of lasting
intimacy. They mate for life, but only with other members of the
pack. From one to four cubs are born with each litter; 75% of
them are male.

Werehyena packs scour the desert and plains in human form,
seeking human settlements to infiltrate. A favorite ploy is for a
single lycanthrope to enter a town or village and use its friends
ability to win its way into the hearts of the people. Some are
even known to shower gifts on “a long-forgotten sister” or rela-
tive. The gifts are typically small gems which it gathers for this
purpose. The lycanthrope then lures the victim out of town to a
trap, where the rest of the pack lies in wait.

Ecology: Werehyenas are covert hunters, preying on gullible hu-
mans whenever possible. However, like their normal cousins,
they are excellent scavengers, capable of eating just about any-
thing in order to survive. Although their numbers are great,
they are too widely scattered to have any profound effect upon
the ecology of Zakhara.

©1992 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Lycanthrope, Werelion

MC13

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Subtropical/Plains,
villages, jungles

FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Pride

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Carnivore

 

 

 

 

INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: D, U
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil
NO. APPEARING: 2-8

ARMOR CLASS: 7
MOVEMENT: 15, Jp 6

HIT DICE: 6+6

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6/1-6/2-12

SPECIAL ATTACKS:
SPECIAL DEFENSES:

Leap, rear claws (2-8 each)
Hit only by silver or +1 or better
weapon, -2 on surprise rolls

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Standard

SIZE: M or L (6’ long)
MORALE: Elite (14)
LEVEL/XP VALUE: 2,000

Werelions are humans able to assume lion form. They are effi-
cient, communal predators, dangerous not only because of their
individual skill but also because of their ability to stalk their
prey as a singleminded group.

In their human form, werelions tend to be thin and sinewy,
with a whiplash speed and agility. Their voices are deep and me-
lodious. Male werelions generally have long, curly yellow or
golden brown hair which they tie back as ponytails or tuck un-
der turbans, while females keep their hair cropped uncharacteri-
sically short, even to the point of appearing almost shaven.
They are always deeply tanned and muscled. In their lion forms
they lose all vestiges of humanity, appearing as preternaturally
large lions with unusually bright eyes and a deeper roar than
most normal lions. Werelions have no half-human form.

Werelions can speak with all felines, though this does not
mean that all cats are friendly toward them. They can even
communicate with feline monsters. They are rarely found with
real lions and prefer human company to the company of ani-
mals.

Combat: Werelions generally drive or lead their prey into am-
bushes, as they are masters at stealth and deception. Each pride
is led by a female; prides of more than six are usually split into
two hunting groups, one led by the werelions’ matriarch and
one by her chief consort. These two groups can communicate in
wereform by their roars, though generally a two-group pride
will always have one set of hunters in human form (except for
nights with a full moon). All leader werelions and 1 in 10 of the
members in any pride have the abilities of a 4th- to 9th-level
thief or ranger in their human form (roll d6+3 to determine a
werelions’ level). Werelion mages have been reported, though
they are exceedingly rare and almost never reach a position of
leadership. They rarely exceed 5th level.

If werelions hit with both front claws on any attack sequence,
they can rake with both their rear claws for 2-8 points each.

In their wereform, werelions can leap up to 60’ from conceal-
ment when ambushing prey. This attack counts as a charge;
leaping werelions gain +2 bonus to their attack roll and a +1
bonus on damage but suffer a penalty of -2 to their initiative

 

 

 

and -1 to their Armor Class. A leaping attack allows the were-
lion an automatic raking attack sequence, regardless of whether
the front claws both hit.

Habitat/Society: Werelions are social lycanthropes, willing to
work as a team to better their chances of catching prey and
avoiding detection. A pride of werelions usually numbers from
1-6 females and 1-4 males. They generally appear as a tribe of
nomadic herdsman, pilgrims, or tinkers of one stripe or another.
Occasionally, they assume the role of mercenaries in their hu-
man form.

A pride of werelions is always ruled by a woman whose au-
thority is unquestioned. The males may brag, may be lazy in
combat or in the hunt, or may even insult their female compan-
ions, but they never disobey their pride’s ruler.

The males are particularly protective when the female were-
lions have recently given birth, and a litter of 1-4 lion cubs is not
uncommon. It does put the whole pride on edge, and any hint of
threat is met with deadly force until the cubs are weaned. They
grow very quickly and are able to assume human form within a
year. They reach maturity in three years, with a size and appear-
ance matching that of a 15-year-old human.

If werelions mate with humans, the offspring resemble hu-
mans until they reach the age of 15, at which point transforma-
tions to lion form begin.

Ecology: Werelions occasionally serve in the retinue of lion
lords. They have also struck bargains with desert centaurs and
cities on the edges of great plains which profit both groups.
Generally they serve as caravan guards or elite military scouts
in exchange for guaranteed hunting privileges in choice range-
lands. Unlike the great cats, werelions can and will commonly
attack humans.

Werelions are great rivals of weretigers and rarely tolerate
their presence for long.
Markeen

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low to Genius (5-18)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Any

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 7
MOVEMENT: 12, Fl 18 (B)
HIT DICE: 2

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6 or by weapon type
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spells
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M
MORALE: Elite (13-14)
LEVEL/XP VALUE: 120

A markeen, or genie double, is a lesser form of genie exiled from
the majority of their kind. Each genie double is cursed at birth to
be the spitting image of a human from Zakhara. The genie dou-
ble is not magically linked to or even necessarily friendly to-
ward that person; they don’t share thoughts, memories, place of
birth (though they are always born at the same instant), or any
other traits besides their outward appearance. The confusion
that results when the genie double of an important personage
finds out who it resembles can be monumental.

A genie double superficially appears to be entirely human.
They are born, live, and die in the same period of time that a
normal human passes through life, and their apparent age al-
ways matches that of their human double (unless the human has
somehow been magically altered to appear younger or older). A
genie double may outlive its human double, but may also die
before its human double does; the two are not spiritually linked
in any way. Not everyone has a genie double. Generally only
famous, wealthy, beautiful, gifted, holy, or utterly villainous in-
dividuals have genie doubles.

It is commonly believed that genie doubles are the result of a
genie rebellion which ended in the losers being forced to live for-
ever as humans, with only tiny traces of their former power.

Combat: Once per day, a genie double may use each of the fol-
lowing spell-like abilities: flame blade, dust devil, invisibility,
and gust of wind.

Although they rarely use the ability near humans, genie dou-
bles also retain geniekind’s ability to fly, and they will escape
from awkward situations this way. At other times, they will im-
personate mages so as not to arouse suspicion. In all other re-
spects, genie doubles fight with the tactics of humans. Their
preferred weapons are scimitars, spears, and crossbows.

Habitat/Society: The markeen are merchants, tinkers, sailors,
and horse traders, living by their wits in small communities that
are isolated socially to prevent the discovery of their identities.
Despite (or because of) the knowledge that they are genies and
thus superior to those around them, the markeen are affable,
friendly, and perfectly willing to live among humans without a
trace of outward patronizing or haughty behavior.

Genie doubles form shadow societies within the human settle-

 

 

 

ments of Zakhara with their own sets of beliefs, leaders, and
rituals. Two of the most important rituals are “the search” and
“the memory.” The search is a traditional coming-of-age ritual in
which each young genie double sets out on an extended quest to
find his or her human counterpart. These trips last from a
month to a year, but the young markeen are not really expected
to find their double. The purpose of the ritual is simply to ex-
pose the adolescents to the world and broaden their horizons.
Actually finding the double is seen as flouting established tradi-
tions, since decades often go by between successful searches.
However, it is possible for a markeen to take the place of his or
her double, once found. The only difficulty they may have is a
lack of knowledge of their double’s life and skills.

The ritual of memory is common among the older markeen.
As genie doubles age, they tell younger markeen the stories of
how they were cast out from the rest of geniekind and how they
have tricked, befuddled, and swindled humans for generations.
The story of exile is told, and other genies are always described
in an unflattering light. The ritual of memory is always held in
secrecy.

There is a subgroup of the genie doubles called the hayan,
who are doubles of bards and poets. They inhabit distant lands,
but if they can be found they can inspire their double to write
immortal poetry.

Ecology: Markeen trade with humans constantly, though there
is no knowledge of this on the part of most humans. Markeen
avoid all other genies and distrust them at best.

Genie doubles will go to great lengths to silence anyone who
uncovers the secret of one of their communities.

©1992 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Maskhi

MC13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any tropical land
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Tribes
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day
DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average to High (8-14)
TREASURE: P(C)
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral
NO. APPEARING: 2-40
ARMOR CLASS: 5 or O
MOVEMENT: 9 (as animal) or 0
HIT DICE: 4+1
THACO: 17
NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-3/1-3 or by weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Surprise
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Shapeshifting
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil
SIZE: M
MORALE: Elite (13)
LEVEL/XP VALUE: 975

Lore mistress or witch doctor: 3,000

Maskhi are humanoids capable of transforming into an animal,
tree, or stone. They dwell in small, xenophobic tribes in the wil-
derness, far from Zakharan civilization.

In their original form, maskhi appear to be lean and wiry
man-sized humanoids. Their faces have elongated features, but
still appear remarkably human, many with wide, cerulean or
green eyes. All have blond, sun-bleached hair, tied back in long
flowing manes or braids down their backs. Their tanned skin is
covered with short, light hair, lending their skin a fuzzy, peach-
like appearance. Maskhi have six-fingered hands and six-toed
feet, their digits ending in talon-like claws. Their agility and
tough skin lend them a natural AC of 5.

Each maskhi is capable of assuming a single animal form that
reflects their personality. Many choose the shape of a small
mammal or bird. In this shape, their AC is still 5 and they re-
ceive the form’s normal movement rate.

Their plant form is usually that of a small tropical tree (from
8-12’ tall) common to the region in which a maskhi tribe dwells.
A maskhi can only assume the form of one type of tree. Maskhi
are AC 0 and stationary while in their arboreal form.

Finally, their stone form is roughly man-sized. Although an
individual maskhi can only assume one type of rock (i.e., ba-
salt, obsidian, quartz, marble, etc.), they can change their shape
to look like a boulder, standing stone, or an outcropping of a
larger rock formation, as desired. Most maskhi choose a form of
stone common to the region in which they dwell. They are AC 0
and stationary in this form as well.

Maskhi communicate only in their own language, although
there is a 10% chance that a member of a Maskhi tribe may
know Common if they have had any interaction with the other
races of Zakhara through raids or trading.

Combat: In their humanoid form, Maskhi prefer to fight with
weapons, preferably the spear, short bow, and jambiya. Al-
though some tribes may have managed to acquire steel weap-
ons, either by trade or raiding, many (50%) use blades and
arrow heads crafted out of bone, which are -1 on damage and
may break (2 in 6 chance) on a natural attack roll of 1. If dis-
armed, they can attack with their sharp claws.

Maskhi use their shapeshifting abilities to aid them in am-

 

 

 

 

 

bushing, hiding, and fleeing. A common tactic is to wait at an
oasis in their tree or stone forms and ambush those who arrive
for a drink. They can change shape quickly, so that their oppo-
nents have a penalty of +4 on surprise.

In their tree and stone forms, they are indistinguishable in
smell and texture from real trees and stones. They can fool even
highly intelligent adversaries, provided the maskhi were not
seen while shapeshifting into their new form. Despite their simi-
larity to natural trees and rock formations, spells and potions
that affect plants and stones (e.g., potion of plant control,
charm plant, transmute rock to mud, pass wall, etc.) have no
effect on a transformed maskhi.

When it is not possible to hide and transform unobserved into
a tree or stone, maskhi shapeshift into their animal form, which
has a greater movement rate, in order to flee.

The leadership of a maskhi tribe with more than 20 individ-
uals is directed by a lore mistress and a witch doctor, each with
33 hit points. The lore mistress is female, with the powers of a
5th- to 8th-level kahin priest. The witch doctor, a male, has the
powers of a 6th- to 9th-level sorcerer wizard. Maskhi witch doc-
tors typically choose sand and wind as their specialization.

Habitat/Society: Maskhi are fearful of “civilized” Zakharans.
They dwell in isolation in the wilderness, living in temporary
shelters made from animal skins stretched over light wooden
frames.

The typical tribe consists of a loose confederation of up to 40
maskhi. Males and females have equal status, although none
share any lasting commitment to each other. Even when an in-
fant is born, only a temporary family is established until the
child learns to shapeshift, after which the parents go their sepa-
rate ways, looking for new mates.

Ecology: All maskhi have a reverence for the land and the envi-

ronment. They hunt only out of necessity, never pleasure.
Most tribes are peaceful, but if their niche is threatened or

encroached upon, they will fight tenaciously to protect it.
Mason-Wasp, Giant

MC13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical/Plains or desert
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: Incidental
ALIGNMENT: Neutral good
NO. APPEARING: 1-2

ARMOR CLASS: 2
MOVEMENT: 6, Fl 21 (B)
HIT DICE: 6+1
THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 4-16/1-4

SPECIAL ATTACKS:
SPECIAL DEFENSES:

Poison and fire breath
Immune to fire

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE:

Nil

SIZE: M (6' long)
MORALE: Steady (11)
LEVEL/XP VALUE: 3,000

Giant mason wasps are enlarged versions of the normal varie-
ty, which is found throughout Zakhara. Both kinds are viewed
as messengers of the gods and bringers of good fortune.

The body of a giant mason wasp is 6' long, with a 12’ wing-
span. Its hard exoskeleton is a lustrous, jet black, but its front
mandibles and mouth glow cherry red with heat. In addition,
the abdomen is tipped with a retractable stinger.

Combat: Giant mason wasps rarely attack humans or demi-
humans, preying mostly on the animals, reptiles, and evil mon-
sters that roam the plains and deserts of Zakhara. If faced with a
single opponent, it will swoop down and grab the victim with its
legs. The wasp will then bite with its red-hot mandibles and at-
tempt to impale the victim with its stinger.

The vicious bite of a giant mason wasp inflicts 2-8 points of
damage. Creatures not immune to fire take an additional 2-8
points of damage from the mandibles’ searing heat.

The wasp’s sting inflicts 1-4 points of damage and injects a
victim with a powerful and deadly toxin. Those not successfully
saving vs. poison lose consciousness in 1-4 rounds and are
wracked by a burning fever. Victims must make two system
shock rolls: if the first is successful, the victim awakes from the
fever after 1-3 days. If the first roll is failed but the second is
successful, the victim awakes from the fever after a week, but
loses 1 point of constitution permanently. A victim with two
failed rolls will die after a week of fever unless they receive the
benefit of a cure disease spell in the interim; they still lose 1
point of constitution permanently.

Giant mason wasps are immune to fire and all fire-based at-
tacks. If faced with more than one opponent, they can also
breathe a cone of fire (5 feet wide at the mouth, 15 feet wide at
the end, and 20 feet long) up to three times per day. The breath
inflicts 6-30 points of damage (save for half damage).

Finally, it is considered very bad luck to kill a giant mason
wasp. At the DM’s discretion,whoever participates in their de-
struction must roll a saving throw or be afflicted with the evil

eye.

Habitat/Society: In the wild, giant mason wasps are solitary
creatures. Their name is derived from the female’s tendency to
create large above-ground structures out of a mixture of dirt

 

CE,
>>,

 

 

 

sand, and saliva called dhilva, which hardens into a rocklike
substance.

Once a month, the female will seek a male and mate. The pair
then hunt for a large animal or evil monster, paralyze it with
their poison, and carry it back to the female’s den, where the
victim is immobilized with more dhilva. The female then lays
1-3 eggs on the victim and seals the entrance to the den with
dhilva. Upon hatching, the larvae consume the host, dissolve
the dhilva with their own saliva, and fly away to establish their
own hunting grounds and dens. Although giant mason wasps
do not hoard treasure, some incidental treasure might be found
in a mason wasp’s den.

Giant mason wasps are often friendly to humans and demi-
humans. They make excellent pets and guardians if a common
mode of communication can be established. Priests, who can
use spells to speak with animals, and rangers who have a natu-
ral affinity for animal handling, are among those most frequent-
ly encountered with a giant mason wasp as a pet or guardian.
They might also be found as guardians in mosques.

Ecology: In both the wilderness and city, giant mason wasps can
be found as protectors of good and the opposers of evil. Their
arch-nemesis is the vishap (q.v.), who break into their dens and
consume wasp eggs as a sugared delicacy.

There are many useful derivatives that can be made from a
mason wasp. Since killing a giant mason wasp can bring bad
luck, most people wait until one of the insects dies from natural
causes before using their remains in a potion. Their fire glands
can be used to make potions of fire breath, while their exoskele-
ton, if powdered, can be used to make either potions of fire re-
sistance or oil of fire elemental invulnerability. Insinuative
poison can be obtained from their poison sacks, which are lo-
cated in the abdomen near the stinger. This poison (Type O)
loses its potency if not used within a week; it can also be used to
make powerful poison antidotes.

©1992 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Nasnas

MC13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Isolated strongholds and ruins
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Tribal

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (7)
TREASURE: M (Q, D)
ALIGNMENT: Lawful Evil

NO. APPEARING: 3-30

ARMOR CLASS: 6

MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: De 2

THACO: 17(19)

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: By weapon type +5
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Fear

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Iron or magic weapons to hit
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M

MORALE: Steady (12)
LEVEL/XP VALUE: 270

Nasnas are humanoid with only half a body: one arm, one leg, |

half a face and half a torso. They are the creation of evil priests
and wizards desiring vigilant guardians to secure their strong-
holds.

Nasnas look like normal human fighters, except that the right
or left half of their body is missing. Their skin has a grayish
tinge to it, and their single eye glints with evil insanity. They
move about by hopping on their single leg. Although this may
appear awkward, they can achieve a reasonable movement rate
(9). They are tireless warriors, needing very little food and sleep
to survive. They are loyal to the wizard or priest who created
them and follow their creators to the death.

A few variants have been encountered with a small, black,
bat-like wing protruding from their single shoulder. This wing
merely contributes to their fearsome appearance (and perhaps
their balance as well). Even with a wing, these nasnas are incap-
able of flight.

Although nasnas can understand Midani perfectly, they never
speak themselves, since they are missing half their vocal cords.
Nasnas are only capable of uttering a strange, high-pitched,
hooting noise, which can be terrifying to hear. Depending on
the volume and tone of the hooting, one can discern the nasnas’s
current emotipnal state.

Combat: Nasnas usually wear armor, which reduces their AC to
6, and rely on weapons for their attacks. Most nasnas (75%)
wield scimitars, but some have been known to fight using battle
axes (15%) or maces (10%) instead. All nasnas have extraordi-
nary Strength in their single arm (18/95), giving them a bonus
of +2 on their attack rolls and +5 bonus on damage.

In combat, their hoots and screams can cause a chilling fear in
all opponents within a 10' radius. Those hearing a nasnas’s
hooting screams must save vs. spells or stand paralyzed with
fear for 2-5 rounds.

Because of their supernatural origins, nasnas can only be hit
with iron or magical weapons.

Habitat/Society: Nasnas are vicious guardians and are typically
found in the strongholds of evil priests and wizards or near ru-
ins.

Nasnas are the product of depraved magic. First, a special po-

  
 

 

 

 

1 Ree

 

 

tion is required, which can only be made by an evil wizard or
priest of 9th level or higher. The concoction is relatively easy
and cheap to make once the formula has been researched. A
drop of the wizard’s or priest's blood poured into the magical
brew creates a magical bond between the spell-caster and the
nasnas after it is born. A few shady alchemists have been known
to make the potion if offered the right price (the buyer must still
supply his own blood).

After the potion has been concocted, it must be injected into a
succulent fruit, which is then sliced in half. If the spell-caster can
somehow convince a woman to eat one of the halves (methods
range from conventional trickery to magical coercion), the
woman will conceive and in nine months give birth to a nasnas.
The mage usually arrives soon afterward to claim his creation.

One nasna can thus be created from each half of an enchanted
fruit. However, a woman can only bear one nasna at a time.
Evil spell-casters, intent upon creating an army of nasnas, usu-
ally have 10-100 innocent women languishing in their strong-
holds.

However, the depravity of creating nasnas en masse does not
usually go unnoticed for long. Women talk, word gets around,
people make visits to the ruling caliph, and pretty soon paladins
are dispatched to put an end to this evil. As a result, nasnas are
most often used as guardians in remote, isolated strongholds.

Ecology: Nasnas are sterile. They mature quickly and live a rela-
tively short life. The twisted magic used in their creation renders
them quite insane for the duration of their lives, although, in the
interim, they are quite obedient servants. Most find a way to
kill themselves before they reach the age of 30.

Nasnas have little or no role in the world’s ecology, living on-
ly to protect and serve their creator. If their creator should ever
die, they lose their reason for existence. In such a situation, over
half choose suicide, throwing themselves off the nearest cliff or
drowning themselves in the closest ocean. The rest wander
about the wilderness, supporting themselves by hunting and
scavenging for the remainder of their short, tragic lives.
Pahari

MC13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical/Seas and oceans
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Community
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Very to Genius (11-18)
TREASURE: U (Q x10, A)
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic good
NO. APPEARING: 2-20
ARMOR CLASS: 7
MOVEMENT: 12, Sw18 or Sw 24
HIT DICE: 3-6
THACO: 3-4 HD: 17

5-6 HD: 15
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: By weapon type or spell
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spells
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Spells
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 25%

SIZE:
MORALE:
LEVEL/XP VALUE:

M (5-6’ long)
Average (10)
650 + 400 per hit die above 3.

Pahari are shapeshifting, marine nymphs that dwell in
Zakhara’s seas and oceans. In their natural forms, they are simi-
lar in appearance to mermaids. They are also able to assume the
form of a small fish and that of a beautiful woman.

The upper body of a pahari is that of a perfectly formed wom-
an, more beautiful than the fullest moon. The lower body of a
pahari is that of a fish, its scales either blue, green, or ruby red.
They prefer this form above all others, although they can as-
sume two other shapes for an emergency or adventure.

Their piscine form resembles a colorful tropical fish, approxi-
mately 12” in length. In this form they can swim at speed 24 and
easily evade large predators by hiding in the small niches and
crevices of a reef or ocean floor.

Their human form matches the upper half of their natural
shape, complete with a pair of slender and willowy legs. They
only assume this shape when venturing onto land or ship, since
in the water their other two forms are more maneuverable.

Pahari can breathe both both water and air. They live in
underwater communities, but occasionally surface to gaze in
fascination at land. The bravest of pahari work up the courage
to sunbathe on rocks near shore or to approach ships and en-
gage in conversation with sailors.

All pahari can speak their own language and Common. They
can also communicate with all fish and nereids. The most intelli-
gent pahari can learn up to four additional languages, choosing
from among those spoken by dolphins, reef giants (q.v.),
whales, and zaratani (q.v.).

Combat: Normally shy and peace-loving creatures, pahari are
loathe to enter into combat. They can fight with any weapon
provided, but rarely ever carry any themselves. They are fond
of magical items, however, and will use them in combat if need-
ed.

Pahari are potent spell-casters. Most are elemental wizards,
casting spells at a level equal to twice their Hit Dice (ie., a 4 HD
pahari can cast spells as an 8th-level wizard). Almost all choose
water as their element of specialization. Their favorite spells in-
clude airy water, command water spirits, conjure (water) ele-
mental, converse with sea creatures, float, sea sight, ship of
fools, strengthen water creatures, waterbane, and water blast.

 

 

 

 

 

Pahari can polymorph into another of their three forms once
per round, at will.

Habitat/Society: Pahari dwell in small communities on the sea
bed, often close to shore. They gather kelp and seaweed, which
forms the staple part of their diet, eating small amounts of shell-
fish and mollusks as well. They never eat fish, considering the
act akin to cannibalism.

A community of pahari consists of 2-20 individuals, evenly
divided in size and Hit Dice. They make small homes out of
shells and coral and tend a garden of kelp or seaweed nearby. A
community of more than five pahari will have a 50% chance of
being attended by 2-12 dolphins.

The pahari are adventuresome and regard surface dwellers with
a fascination that borders on obsession. They will collect anything
that pertains to life above the waves (especially magical items), of-
ten welcoming sailors into their communities to hear them spin
tales of their homelands. With this preoccupation about life above
water, it is not uncommon for a younger pahari to venture onto
land in her human form, if only to spend a day shocking the vil-
lagers (who promptly find her some clothes), eating surface food,
dancing, and singing long into the night before returning home. A
few have been known to stay longer (although this is discouraged
by the older, wiser pahari), even marrying a good-aligned surface
dweller in some instances.

Like most faerie creatures, pahari have a very long life span
(300-400 years). They soon outlive a human husband, after-
ward returning home to the sea for good. The older pahari,
many who have already experienced this heartbreaking loss, do
their best to console their newly-returned sister. As a general
rule, the older and wiser pahari prefer short, frequent encount-
ers with surface dwellers.

Ecology: Pahari are staunch protectors of their marine environ-
ment and oppose evil sea creatures, like sea hags, at every op-
portunity. A pahari’s kiss can bestow water breathing on the

lucky recipient for a day.
©1992 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Rom

MC13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Subterranean wilderness
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Tribal
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night
DIET: None
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: R(D
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil
NO. APPEARING: 1-8
ARMOR CLASS: 1
MOVEMENT: 12
HIT DICE: 15+1
THACO: 2 (5)
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-10 +8
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Throwing rocks, strength
drain, fear
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil
SIZE: H (17 tall)
MORALE: Fearless (19)

LEVEL/XP VALUE: 10,000

The rom are a race of subterranean, undead giants that with-
drew from the surface world in the distant past. They are sullen,
malicious, and angry creatures, attacking any who disturb their
final dwelling places or cairns.

Rom are all male. They have tall, muscular physiques, similar
to humans in proportion, with thinning, bone-white hair, sunk-
en, glassy eyes, long, curling fingernails, and ashen-gray skin.
They stand about 17’ tall, retaining the supernatural Strength
they possessed in life (20). They speak with sad, resonant voic-
es. All are talented singers, poets, and musicians.

The rom, like most living giants, carry some of their belong-
ings in a large sack. Their more valuable treasures remain hid-
den safely in their cairns. A rom’s sack will typically include
1-12 throwing rocks, some treasure, and 1-8 personal items (in-
cluding a musical instrument of some sort, usually a flute).

Rom speak their own language and that of desert giants and
jungle giants (q.v.). Most (75%) can also speak Common.

Combat: The rom are terrifying enemies. Intruding upon their
cairns uninvited is a good way to earn their enmity and an early
demise. A single blow from their strong arm inflicts 1d10 +8
points of damage and drains the victim of 1-4 points of
Strength. When a victim’s Strength drops below 0, he is slain,
drained of life force by the rom’s chilling touch. Lost Strength
points return at a rate of 1 point per day of rest.

In addition, rom radiate an aura of fear in a 30-foot radius.
Creatures of less than 2 Hit Dice automatically flee (no save).
All others in the area of effect are entitled to a saving throw vs.
spells. Those who make their saves can attack the rom without
penalty; those who fail suffer a -2 penalty to their attack and
damage rolls and a +2 penalty to their Armor Class.

Although rom rarely have the opportunity to throw rocks in
their subterranean crypts, they have been known to hurl them
at retreating intruders or while defending their lairs against an
assault. They can throw rocks up to 300 yards, inflicting 2-24
points of damage with a successful hit.

Rom can only be affected by +2 or better magical weapons.
Enchantment/charm and cold-based spells have no effect on
them. Like all undead, they are immune to poison and paralysis.
They are turned as “Special” undead.

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Rom are thought to be all that remains of an
ancient race of giant herdsmen. They lived in the hills and on the
plains where their giant cows could graze, some practicing a
limited form of agriculture. They were a quiet, peace-loving
people whose end came when their wives produced only male
children; there were no further generations.

Shaking their fists at the sad destiny Fate had passed upon
them, they built enormous stone cairns for themselves, fash-
ioned out of monolithic granite slabs. Entire clans of rom de-
scended into their self-made tombs, burying themselves alive.
However, so great was their collective self-pity and anger at
Fate, that their existence persisted beyond death.

Their granite cairns can still be found today, towering over
the plains or nestled among the hills. They are shunned by all
forms of animal and insect life. Nearby vegetation appears
stunted and lacks its usual color. All is quiet near these tombs
during the day, but at night, one can hear a loud lamentation
rising from within the cold, stone cairns, a plaintive cry against
Fate.

The giants are known to receive brave visitors during the
night, who politely knock on the entrance to the tombs and
humbly request hospitality for the evening. Those who brashly
intrude on the giants during the night, or who break into a cairn
during the day, will be immediately attacked by the 1-8 rom
present in the tomb. They will throw any corpses outside as a
warning to others against further unwarranted intrusions.

Ecology: As undead, the rom no longer play a part in the
world’s ecology. They remain buried in their tombs, never ven-
turing outside except to punish uncivil intruders.

The rom are a musical and poetic race. Brave bards who have
visited with them for only a short while are said to have been
inspired to compose a masterful, if tragic, song or epic poem. If
recited or sung at night, it will have the same effect on the audi-
ence as if the bard were playing pipes of haunting. The perform-
ance is so emotionally demanding on the bard that it can only be
attempted once per week.
Sabu Lords

MC13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical/Plains and savannah
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)
TREASURE: F

ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1-2

ARMOR CLASS: 3 (males), 4 (females)
MOVEMENT: 12, Jp 6

HIT DICE: 8+8

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6/1-6/2-16
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Roar, summoning
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: L (12-16' long)
MORALE: Champion (16)
LEVEL/XP VALUE: 4,000

Sabu lords, or Lion Lords, are proud giant cats that live on the
arid plains and savannahs of Zakhara. These intelligent lions
are extremely territorial and will harass those who travel
through their domains without first asking permission.

Sabu lords are larger and much stronger cats than their
smaller cousins. They all have bright golden fur, while males are
also distinguished by their flowing, golden-red manes. These gi-
ant predators measure 5-6' at the shoulder and have a deafening
roar that can be heard for miles in all directions.

Sabu lords speak the languages of all cats as well as Midani.

Combat: Lion lords rarely enter into combat alone. They are al-
ways attended by 2-12 common lions with maximum hit points,
who will fight to the death if ordered by their sovereign.

Like their common cousins, the senses of sabu lords are in-
credibly keen, and they have a +2 bonus on their surprise rolls.
They physically attack with their claws and bite and can leap as
far as 60’.

Sabu lords can deliver a powerful roar, which has a 60’long,
cone-shaped area of effect and is similar to an enhanced shout
spell. The roar affects all creatures within its area of effect, caus-
ing 3-18 points of damage and permanent deafness. A successful
save versus paralyzation reduces the damage by half and limits
the deafness to a duration of 1-4 turns. Any exposed brittle or
crystal substance can be shattered by the roar. (Objects in a
creature’s possession are entitled to a save vs. crushing blow.)
Deafened creatures receive a +1 penalty to surprise and initia-
tive rolls, while those casting spells with verbal components
have a 25 % chance of miscasting them. A lion lord can only use
its special roar three times a day.

In addition to the effects described above, the roar of a sabu
lord will summon all great cats in a 15-mile radius. On the
plains, this means 1-4 cheetahs and 2-12 common lions will re-
spond within 1 turn, with a like number arriving 2-5 turns later.
If the boundaries of a forest are nearby, the roar will also bring
1-2 jaguars, 1-2 leopards, and 1-4 wild tigers in 2-5 turns. This
small army of great cats will follow the commands of the sum-
moning sabu lord to the death.

Habitat/Society: Sabu lords are haughty and vain creatures.
The common lions in a lord’s continual attendance provide for

 

 

 

 

 

his or her sustenance, although they may all hunt together occa-
sionally for entertainment. Sabu lords typically claim all lands
within a 15-mile radius of their lair as their domain. All cats
dwelling therein are considered to be loyal subjects, while other
beings (sentient or not) are considered to be either guests or po-
tential meals.

The arrogance of a sabu lord is such that any adult will never
be found in another lord’s territory. Mating takes place rather
briefly at the boundary between two domains. The product of
such a union is usually a single cub, which is fostered at the
mother’s “court” until it reaches adulthood, after which it must
leave and establish its own domain. If an encounter with two
sabu lords is called for, one will be a female and the other a cub
(with 1-7 hit dice).

Anyone traveling through a sabu lord’s domain is viewed as a
trespasser unless he pays homage to the feline sovereign and
begs for permission to pass through the cat’s lands. It is not un-
common for merchants to leave gifts of gold, gems, and food for
the sabu lord as tribute, although a poor traveler with a flatter-
ing tongue may just as easily gain safe passage. Even a large,
well-armed caravan is not immune to the wrath of an unappeas-
ed sabu lord. A small army of great cats will be sent to stalk and
terrify the trespassers. At night, the cats’ roars will foster sleep-
lessness, and lightning-swift raids will deprive even the most
vigilant of parties of a few mounts. Voyagers traveling in small
numbers can expect even more harassment. Poorly-armed or
solitary travelers will be repeatedly attacked by the great cats.

Ecology: Superstitious people consider the sabu lord to be a
summoner of evil spirits. Anyone spending a night with a dozen
lions, cheetahs, tigers, and jaguars roaring just beyond the light
of their campfire would be hard pressed to deny such a rumor.
The pelt of a sabu lord is rumored to avert evil spirits and curs-
es, in particular the evil eye. In fact, if the hair from a sabu lord’s
mane is woven into a braid, it will protect the owner with the
effects of a continual avert evil eye spell for 60 days.

©1992 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Sakina

MC13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Special

INTELLIGENCE: High (13-14)

TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic good

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 0, -4 when invisible

MOVEMENT: Fl 48 (A)

HIT DICE: 7 +7

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 3-18

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Invisibility, +1 or better weap-
ons to hit.

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 50%

SIZE: M (5-6' tall)

MORALE: Champion (16)

LEVEL/XP VALUE: 5,000

Sakina are friendly air sprites, faerie creatures native to
Zakhara. They roam the skies looking for interesting scents and
amusing adventures. They have no ties to the Elemental Plane
of Air and are not considered elementals.

Sakina are creatures of the wind and normally invisible; they
receive all bonuses attributed to invisible creatures, including a
-4 bonus to AC. By controlling the humidity of their bodies
and drawing in moisture from the surrounding air, they can be-
come partially visible, appearing like a man-shaped patch of
cloud or mist. Because of their incredible speed in the air, they
have a natural AC of 0 (- 4 when invisible).

They communicate with other sakina using their own lan-
guage. Many (60%) also know Midani.

Combat: Sakina are dangerous opponents. Their normal attack
is a compressed wave of air that buffets the target for 3-18 points
of damage. The victim of an attack must make a Dexterity
check or be blown backward automatically losing initiative in
the following round.

More often, however, a sakina attacks using magic. They can
make up to 7 creatures, each weighing no more than 700 lbs., as
light as the air for up to 7 turns (unless the victims save vs. mag-
ic); this is similar in effect to a ride the wind spell. Affected crea-
tures will rise into the air and be blown away in the direction
and speed of the prevailing winds. They can prevent movement
only by grasping onto something stationary (a tree branch or
cliff face, for instance). The sakina can control the victims’ alti-
tude at will (but not speed and direction, which depends on the
wind conditions), raising or lowering their victims at a move-
ment rate of up to 120' per round. Victims drop to the ground
after 7 turns (1d6 points of damage per 10’ fallen). Sakina can
invoke this power three times a day. They often bestow this on
befriended or endangered land-dwellers, or they use the spell of-
fensively to blow away their enemies. Sakina have been known
to cast this spell on other creatures simply for the sake of amuse-
ment.

Sakina can also control winds (as per the 5th-level clerical
spell), casting the spell three times a day at the 14th level of ex-
perience. This power is often used in conjunction with their abil-
ity to make others ride the wind.

 

SAN

aes
.

4,
%,
Z
%
$
5

SSO,
~
BSN
s
SHAY
Ss
ses
“ow” Ss
WH

ONE,

SAY,
soap
“

aes

POWO

QW

aS

Wires

SO
WN

*qv
.

\\S

s
a

Ws

W

SOSH Ge ,
Sean
NASA QQ
is eS

 

 

Wh

 

They can also carry a single human-sized passenger tirelessly
at full movement rate, covering up to 300 miles in a single day.

All sakina possess 50% magic resistance and can only be
harmed by magical weapons.

Habitat/Society: The sky is home to all sakina. They are solitary
wanderers who claim no lair and hoard no treasure.

Sakina sustain themselves by ingesting particulate nourish-
ment in the form of smells. While a human might eat a roast
pheasant, sakina can feed solely on its aroma. They can just as
easily dine on the aroma of perfume and scented oils, such as the
bouquet of a rose.

A ritual is known among wind elemental mages for summon-
ing a sakina. It is not a summoning spell per se, but rather the
burning of expensive incense, spices, and fragrances that the air
sprites consider especially delectable (including cinnamon,
cloves, rose oil, myrrh, and saffron). Once the components
have been assembled and ignited in a brazier, sooner or later
(usually within 2-5 days) a sakina will arrive to feast on the bou-
quet of aromas. The DM should assume that a day’s worth of
components costs 100-400 gp.

If approached respectfully just before he has finished dining
on the smells, a sakina will usually agree to help the “summon-
er” by providing aerial transportation to a distant location (no
more than a few days’ travel). The sakina will almost never ac-
company a wizard or other recent friend on any prolonged jour-
ney. These chaotic creatures rarely stay attached to any plan or
acquaintance for very long.

Ecology: The sakina are widely known for their helpful, if mer-
curial, demeanor. They are friendly to all nonevil aerial crea-
tures, especially simurghs (q.v.) and djinn. They are the staunch
allies of the buraq(q.v.) and are known to answer their summons
and requests for assistance immediately.

A few magical items related to flight can be enchanted using a
sakina’s whisper as a prime component. In addition, their es-
sence can be used to concoct a potion of flying.
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Serpent Lord MCI
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical/ Hills and ruins
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Genius (17-18)
TREASURE: A, S, T

ALIGNMENT: Lawful good

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: -2

MOVEMENT: 6

HIT DICE: 16

THACO: 5

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 4-24

SPECIAL ATTACKS:
SPECIAL DEFENSES:

Constriction, spells
Spells

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE:

70%

SIZE: G (50' long)
MORALE: Champion (16)
LEVEL/XP VALUE: 15,000

Serpent lords, who resemble giant white cobras with human
faces, are renowned healers and sages. They have a kind and
compassionate nature.

The body of a serpent lord resembles that of a snow-white,
hooded cobra, up to 50 feet in length. They have a human face
and a warm, friendly smile.

They can communicate in their own language and that shared
by all serpents. They can also speak Midani.

Combat: Serpent lords regard themselves as healers and
scholars, not fighters. They are always protected by at least four
giant constrictor snakes with maximum hit points. It is not un-
common for a serpent lord to be attended by an additional 2-12
giant poisonous snakes and 2-8 spitting snakes (cobras). These
guardians will fight to the death in order to protect their king or
queen.

The serpent lord is endowed with strong magical powers.
Each has the abilities of a 16th-level cleric with an 18 Wisdom,
able to turn undead, and memorize the following number of
spells: nine 1st level, nine 2nd level, eight 3rd level, seven 4th
level, four 5th level, three 6th level, and one 7th level. They typ-
ically choose spells from the healing, necromantic, divination,
protection, and charm spheres, but have been known to memo-
rize combat spells as well. Their strong magical resistance pro-
tects them from the effects of most spells used against them.

Should their spells and guardians fail them, serpent lords can
attack by coiling their serpentine body around an opponent and
constricting for 4-24 points of damage. They can entangle up to
eight man-sized opponents in their steel-like coils. Once a con-
striction attack has been successful, the victim takes damage au-
tomatically on subsequent rounds until freed. It requires a
combined total of 70 Strength points to extricate a man-sized
victim from a serpent lord’s crushing embrace.

Habitat/Society: Serpent lords live in large, secluded caves in
the wilderness, far from civilized lands. Their caves are typi-
cally found in barren, stony hills favored by snakes or in long-
abandoned ruins.

Serpent lords are powerful monarchs. As king or queen of the
snakes in a 20-mile radius of their lair, they can summon 10-20
normal and giant constrictors, 10-60 normal and giant poison-
ous snakes, and 10-40 spitting snakes to their defense if given

 

 

 

 

enough time (1-4 days). The reptiles normally found in the ser-
pent lord’s company are regarded as his friends and family as
well as his guardians. They will not be sacrificed in combat fool-
ishly or haphazardly. The serpent lord will personally protect
his lesser cousins against powerful adversaries and predators.

Perhaps the biggest concern for the serpent lord and his pro-
tecting snakes is the acquisition of food. They are primarily car-
nivores, preferring lamb or beef; chickens and other birds will
suffice, but fish is definitely out of the question. Serpent lords
prefer their meat cooked whenever possible. Anyone bringing
meat to a serpent lord will earn a -4 bonus on the reaction roll;
anyone offering roasted or cooked meat to a serpent lord will
earn a -10 on the reaction roll.

Serpent lords are widely sought after for their healing powers.
Over the years, they tend to accumulate a considerable hoard,
consisting mainly of gifts left behind in gratitude by cured pa-
tients. Serpent lords are not greedy or avaricious creatures,
however, and will often bestow a precious jewel or jar of gold to
a needy supplicant or a favored guest. Of those unable to afford
luxuriant gifts in exchange for healing, a serpent lord might re-
quire that they start a fire, catch a wild pig or herd animal, and
cook it for the serpent lord’s dinner.

Serpent lords are sages as well as powerful healers. They are
specialized in the the lore of herbalism, magical potions, and
clerical magic in general. They are sometimes the guardians of a
powerful clerical or religious magical item (like a Book of Exalt-
ed Deeds or a Sword + 5, Holy Avenger), yielding it up to who-
ever can perform a preordained quest.

Ecology: Serpent lords are the champions and protectors of
snakes in the wild. They devote almost all of their attention to
the practice of healing.

A wide variety of powerful potions can be made from the
brain of a serpent lord. The right half of the brain is extremely
toxic and can be used to make poisons. The left half of the brain
is nourishing and life-giving. It is a prime ingredient in elixirs of
life and potions of longevity.

©1992 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Serpent, Winged

MC13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical/ Forests
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Flocks
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Herbivore
INTELLIGENCE: Semi (2-4)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 2-8
ARMOR CLASS: 5
MOVEMENT: 12, Fl 18 (B)
HIT DICE: 4+4
THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Poison, spark shower
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Immune to electricity

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: L (8-10" long)
MORALE: Average (9)
LEVEL/XP VALUE: 1,400

 

Winged serpents, sometimes called spark snakes, are colorful
reptiles that dwell in Zakhara’s forests and jungles. Winged ser-
pents come in many colors, ranging from sky blue and emerald
green to raspberry red. They are supported by invisibly swift,
gossamer wings, making them resemble reptilian hum-
mingbirds. When their delicate wings are folded back, winged
serpents can spider climb at will.

Combat: Winged serpents move with liquid grace and devastat-
ing speed. They always receive a -3 bonus to initiative.

The bite of a winged serpent inflicts 1d4 points of damage and
injects the victim with a corrosive, acidic fluid. This poison has
an onset time of 1 round and inflicts an additional 2d8 points of
damage for the following 2 rounds (half damage if a save vs.
poison is made).

By far the most dangerous attack of these reptiles is their
sparklike breath weapon. Their wings beat so quickly that they
build up a static charge from the ambient air (especially in the
humid forest). A winged serpent can discharge this static elec-
tricity from its mouth in a spark shower, a cloud of dancing
sparks and electrical energy 10 feet in diameter. Those caught in
the area of effect take 2d8 (2-16) points of damage (half if a save
vs. breath weapon is made). The spark shower will also ignite
any exposed flammable objects, like clothes, hair, dry wood, or
lamp oil. Once it has been discharged, it takes one turn for a
winged serpent to build its static charge back up. All winged
serpents are immune to electricity.

Winged serpents are vulnerable to fire-based attacks (espe-
cially their delicate wings), against which they save at penalty of
-2. If a winged serpent fails its saving throw against a fire at-
tack, assume that its wings are incinerated. Although this won't
affect its ability to bite a victim, the serpent cannot use its breath
weapon until the wings grow back.

Habitat/Society: Winged serpents must eat constantly in order
to survive. They flit about the jungle in small flocks, searching
for tropical fruits, from which they draw their nourishment. A
winged serpent will fly up to one and inject it with corrosive
venom. The venom breaks down the fruit into a soft, juicy mix-
ture, partially digesting the fruit while it still remains in its skin.
The serpent will then suck out the fruity pulp through the inci-

 

 

 

 

 

sions made by its fangs. A typical winged serpent will eat rough-
ly ten times its weight in fruit each day, just to stay alive.

Winged serpents mate as often as they eat (ie., incessantly),
although they do not care for their young, which are born live
and wingless. They are born with their spider climbing ability,
which helps them climb fruit trees and search for food. The
young are dark green in color to help them blend in better with
the foliage, gaining their chromatic hues only after their wings
mature. During the first few months of life, winged serpents are
extremely vulnerable to an entire host of predators that roam
the jungle heights (including mundane snakes, monkeys, and gi-
ant insects). Vestigial wings appear after a month of life, and
become fully functional after three months.

Winged serpents have no permanent lair and hoard no trea-
sure.

Ecology: Winged serpents play an important role in the jungle
ecology. Like giant bees, they transport pollen from fruit tree to
fruit tree and help with the distribution of seeds throughout the
jungle. As adults, they have no natural enemies.

If captured during their first month of life before their wings
have matured, they make excellent (if expensive) pets. They
must consume a great quantity of fruit to survive, eating on av-
erage 100 gp worth of fruit each month (this cost might be re-
duced if a large orchard is available). A skilled animal trainer
can teach a winged serpent up to three tasks or tricks per point
of intelligence, which the creature will gladly perform (provided
a supply of fresh fruit is constantly at hand). They can even be
trained as guardians, although rogues have quickly discovered
that unless they are extremely well-trained, they can be easily
distracted by a decoy of aromatic, fresh fruit.

Few useful by-products can be obtained from a winged ser-
pent. Their poison decomposes almost immediately after expo-
sure to air, and their hide is too thin and fragile to serve as good
leather. Their wings, however, if powdered and mixed with ink,
can be used to inscribe a protection from lightning scroll.
Silats

MC13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Young Adult

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any land Any land
FREQUENCY: Uncommon Rare to very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary Solitary or family
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Night Night
DIET: Carnivore Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12) High to Excep-

tional (13-16)
TREASURE: R W (D)
ALIGNMENT: Any chaotic Any chaotic
NO. APPEARING: 1 1 or 3-9
ARMOR CLASS: 3 0 or

-3, Matriarch
MOVEMENT: 15 15
HIT DICE: 7 9 or 12, Matriarch
THACO: 10 (13) 8 (11) or

6 (9), Matriarch
NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 8-11/8-11/9-15 8-11/8-11/9-15
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 30% 55%
SIZE: L (10’ tall) L-G (12-15' tall)
MORALE: Elite (14) Elite (14)
LEVEL/XP_ VALUE: 5,000 10,000

Matriarch: 17,000

Silats are a race of female, shapeshifting hags that roam both the
wilderness and cities of Zakhara in magical disguise, searching
for food.

In their true form, a silat appears to be a giant female human-
oid with pale green or blue skin and curved ram’s horns curling
from each side of her head. The size of the horns depends on the
silat’s age, growing a complete spiral every century or so. The
hair is usually the same color as the skin, but of a darker hue.
Their teeth and nails look like yellowed ivory, but are harder
and sharper than obsidian.

In both their polymorphed and their natural shape, silats
wear rags that barely cover their bent and wrinkled forms.

Combat: Although the shapeshifting abilities of silats vary with
age, all possess strong magic resistance and superhuman
Strength (19). They attack physically with their daggerlike
claws and a vicious bite. Silats can only be affected by magical
or iron weapons and regenerate at a rate of 1 hp/round. They
are unaffected by poison or mind-influencing spells (illusions,
charms, ESP, and the like).

Younger silats (up to a century old) can polymorph all but one
part of their form (usually the feet) three times/day. They will
always take great pains to hide these appendages by covering
them with rags. Once silats reach adulthood (one to five centu-
ries old), they can fully polymorph self at will. In addition,
adult silats can cast polymorph other three times/day. The most
ancient of silats (over five centuries old) are revered as matri-
archs. They can polymorph self and polymorph other (-4 on
opponent’s save) at will and can polymorph any object three
times/ day.

Neutral and good silats use their polymorphing abilities to
move unnoticed and unbothered through human and demi-
human society, where they are most commonly (and unknow-
ingly) encountered. Evil silats use their powers to attract
victims, frequently posing as helpless old women in need (or
flirtatious maidens) in order to lure unsuspecting youths to a

 

 

Bisco nacre

 

 

 

deserted location.

Habitat/Society: Silats are typically solitary creatures. They can
be found just about anywhere in Zakharan society. While hunt-
ing for food, silats will pose as hideously ugly human females to
discourage encounters.

In the wilderness, adult silats may be encountered alone, or
with their family. Silats propagate their species by mating with
ogre magi. Male offspring of such a union are ogre magi, while
the female offspring are silats. Should a family be encountered,
it will consist of an adult or matriarch silat with 1-4 sons (ogre
magi) and 1-4 daughters (young silats).

Common to all silats is a desire to be left alone, and failing
that, to be treated with respect. Every village or town has a sto-
ry of a braggart who insulted a decrepit crone one day and was
found sporting a donkey’s tail the next. Even an evil silat will
not attack one who bows respectfully and hails her politely with
a friendly greeting. Those displaying refined manners and
proper etiquette are rarely eaten and more often are helped on a
quest or journey.

Ecology: Much of a silat’s nocturnal activity cycle is spent in
search of food. Neutral and good silats dine only on animal
meat, while evil silats prefer human or demihuman flesh.

In spite of their parasitic or predatory relationship with hu-
man society, many humans and demihumans regard them with
ambivalence, partly out of fear, but mostly because they are
known to be extremely helpful to those approaching them in the
proper manner.

Unfortunately, the “proper manner” of greeting a silat varies
from individual to individual. With some, a polite salutation,
such as “Peace upon you and your family!” may suffice. For oth-
ers, a visitor might be required to perform a few minor chores,
like tidying the silat’s lair or combing her tangled hair. A few
eccentric silats are known to only help visitors who perform the
exact opposite of what was requested, polymorphing others in-
to an embarrassing or ugly shape.

©1992 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Simurgh

MC13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Warm hills and mountains
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Genius (17-18)
TREASURE: (A)
ALIGNMENT: Lawful good
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 1
MOVEMENT: 3, Fl 48 (A)
HIT DICE: 10+10
THACO: 11

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-16/2-16
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: G (20’ wingspan)
MORALE: Elite (14)
LEVEL/XP VALUE: 10,000

The simurgh, sometimes called the king of the birds, is known
to aid and protect other lawful good beings. It is a peace-loving
and friendly creature, helpful and kind to all good creatures.

In its natural form, the simurgh has a male or female human
face and the body of an enormous eagle with orange metallic
feathers. Two pairs of golden wings sprout from its back, and its
long tail feathers can spread into a magnificent fan that would
make even a peacock jealous. On the ground or while perching,
a simurgh uses its talons for support.

Simurghs speak the languages of all birds and creatures of the
air (including air elementals and sakina). They can also speak
Midani.

Combat: Although keenly interested in helping other good crea-
tures, simurghs are pacifistic and will rarely enter into physical
combat, even to save another being’s life.

A simurgh can employ the following spell-like abilities at 10th
level of ability (available once per round) at will: detect invisi-
bility, know alignment, infravision, shape change (into the form
of any small bird or human only), and speak with animals/
monsters (birds and avian creatures only).

When the need arises, a simurgh will unfold its beautiful gold-
en tail, which will begin to glow with all the colors of the rain-
bow, dazzling everyone nearby (friend and foe alike). The tail
feathers shift in hue, constantly changing their fascinating, intri-
cate patterns. Everyone within a 50-foot radius must save vs.
spells or stand transfixed (hypnotized by the scintillating color)
until 1d4 +1 rounds after the simurgh folds up its tail. Creatures
must save each round they spend in the area of effect. Although
it takes one round for a simurgh to unfold its tail and start the
colors in motion, the dazzling display can be maintained indefi-
nitely with little or no concentration. The unfolding of a si-
murgh’s tail is usually the prelude to its hasty retreat.

If cornered with no avenue for escape, a simurgh can physi-
cally attack twice in a round with a powerful wing buffet (one
from each set of wings). The wing feathers are not only metallic,
but have razor-sharp edges, inflicting 2d8 points of damage.
Their strong claws are not used in combat except when rescuing
or transporting other good-aligned beings.

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: Simurghs are solitary creatures, about 65% of
which are female. Although treated with respect and generally
obeyed by most avian beings, simurghs are usually (about 70%
of the time) found with a flock of admirers. This “court” of birds
might include any of the normal birds (for instance, nightin-
gales, sparrows, and swallows), small predators (hawks, eagles,
or vultures), and giant-sized eagles, condors, or perhaps even a
roc. These wandering “courts” of birds are only encountered far
away from human habitation.

Simurghs keep no lair, except when mating, which occurs
about once every six years. A mating pair prefers a mountain
cavern, deep in the wilderness, in which to rear their young.
Such a lair will include two adults and 1-3 helpless young. (Treat
these young as having half the hit dice of their parents; they
have no attacks except their shimmering tail. Allow a +3 bonus
on saves against the hypnotizing effect of the tail.) The simurghs
will be guarded by 3-12 giant eagles and 1-2 rocs. The mated
pair separates after the young are old enough to care for them-
selves (about 2-3 years old).

Simurghs have no interest in collecting or keeping material
wealth or treasure.

Ecology: Because of the astonishing beauty of their tails, si-
murghs are frequently hunted, especially by humans who dwell
in the mountainous regions of Zakhara.

The golden tail feather of a simurgh, if freely given, is strong-
ly magical. Described by some as “a piece of the sun,” it radiates
continual light and will hypnotize any and all creatures within a
50’ radius (including the owner, if he is not careful; all creatures
viewing the feather get a +3 bonus on their saving throws vs.
spell). A simurgh’s tail feather is needed to concoct a potion of
rainbow hues and to enchant a robe of scintillating colors. It can
also be used to inscribe color spray, hypnotic pattern, rainbow
pattern, prismatic spray, prismatic wall, and prismatic sphere
scrolls.
Stone Maidens

MC13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Any stone (near desert)
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: High (13-14)
TREASURE: D
ALIGNMENT: Neutral good
NO. APPEARING: 1 or 1-4
ARMOR CLASS: 8
MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 5

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: By weapon type or spell
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Suggestion
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 40%

SIZE: M(5’tall)
MORALE: Steady (12)
LEVEL/XP VALUE: 5,000

Stone maidens are exquisitely beautiful damsels that dwell in
rock formations, standing stones, and the walls of secluded ca-
verns and caves.

A stone maiden is said to have a face like the moon, eyes like
a gazelle, and lips like rose petals. She looks like a beautiful hu-
man or elven female, wearing simple, loose fitting robes and
veils. She favors garments that reflect the kind of stone she in-
habits. A stone maiden dwelling in a sandstone might wear
dusty red, while one living in a basalt cave would favor black.

Combat: Like a gazelle, stone maidens are shy, peaceful, and
quick to flee. If angered or provoked, however, they become
dangerous opponents. They can fight with any weapon provid-
ed, but almost always prefer to use magic. Stone maidens can
cast the following spells at 14th level of ability, once per round,
three times/day: animate rock, meld into stone, spike stones,
stone shape, stone tell, and suggestion.

If confronted with hostile adversaries, a stone maiden’s first
action will be to use her powerful suggestion (-3 on saves) and
attempt to convince the adversaries to leave. Failing that, she
will escape by casting an improved version of meld into stone,
which allows her to step into any rock formation and remain
there indefinitely. Using this improved version of the spell, she
can use her other magical abilities as desired while safely en-
closed in the protective rock.

A stone maiden’s most powerful attack is her ability to ani-
mate rock, which causes a man-sized stone to move at up to 60
feet per round and attack her adversaries (AC 1, HD 11, hp 28-
84 (28d3), THACO 15, Dmg 14-28 (14d2). If a man-sized stone is
not available for animating, she can create one using stone
shape. She will only use this attack if seriously threatened (by a
group with mining tools, for instance).

Finally, a stone maiden will use her stone tell ability to gather
information about potential visitors to her lair, casting spike
stones to hinder their approach should they be manifestly evil
creatures,

Because of their powerful bond with the Elemental Plane of
Earth, stone maidens are not harmed by earth-affecting magic.

Habitat/Society: Stone maidens have a mystic bond with the
particular rock formation or standing stone of which they are

 

SS

NY
iN
BN
aN

NY

hie

 

Yen
WAN

a
VAS

(literally) a part. They will never stray more than a quarter mile
from this stone; if forcibly removed they lose 1 hit point per turn
until they perish.

Over the years, stone maidens may acquire treasure, either as
booty from evil creatures driven from the proximity of their
lairs or as suggested gifts from rude or pushy desert nomads,
some of whom consider it a great accomplishment to have a
former stone maiden to add to their collection of wives.

Many stone maidens have lairs near gold or gem deposits and
use their magical talents to gather and shape treasure into pleas-
ing shapes and sizes. They will keep their cache hidden inside a
stone near their lair, enclosing the treasure in solid rock using
their stone-shaping ability.

According to some legends, stone maidens are the ancestors
of a desert priestess who was stolen from her tribe and impris-
oned in stone by an evil dao. The stone maidens are thus
thought to be searching for a way to remove their curse and re-
turn to their former nomadic existence. But, while some stone
maidens appear melancholy (supporting the desert nomads’ leg-
ends), there are just as many who are content, assertive, and self
reliant, manifesting no apparent need to be “rescued” from any
curse.

The task of freeing a stone maiden is described in legends as a
monumental undertaking, usually involving the recovery of one
of the maiden’s personal possessions (a veil, for instance) from a
powerful dao or genie. Should the token be returned, the stone
maiden’s link with the Elemental Plane of Earth would be bro-
ken, and she would lose all spell-like abilities forever, becoming
a normal woman.

Ecology: Stone maidens sometimes act as protectors for the
lands and desert in a quarter-mile radius of their lair. More often
than not, however, these withdrawn creatures play little or no
part in Zakhara’s ecology.

©1992 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Vishap

MC13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical/ Hills or desert
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary or clan
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: High (13-14)
TREASURE: Special
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil

NO. APPEARING: 1(2-9)

ARMOR CLASS: 3 (base)
MOVEMENT: 18 Jp 6

HIT DICE: 8 (base)

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 and 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4/1-4/2-12 and

2-8 (+combat modifier)

 

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Special

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Variable

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Variable

SIZE: Huge (25' base)

MORALE: Elite (14)

LEVEL/XP VALUE: Variable

Age Body Lgth.(') Tail Lgth.(') AC
1 1-4 1-5 7

2 4-12 5-10 6

3 12-20 10-18 5

4 20-28 18-26 4

5 28-35 26-32 3

6 35-42 32-40 2

7 42-50 40-48 1

8 50-58 48-56 0

9 58-66 56-64 -1
10 66-72 64-70 -2
11 72-80 70-78 -3
12 80-88 78-86 -4

A vishap is a flightless Zakharan dragon, a crafty and cow-
ardly creature that preys on the weak and flees the strong. They
are sly, cunning predators that fight through stealth and deceit.
Like all dragons, vishaps are exceedingly vain and greedy.

Despite its great size, a vishap can run, climb, and jump with
surprising agility, although it likes to foster a sedentary image in
order to catch its opponents off-guard. The scales of a vishap
can blend in perfectly with its surroundings (lending it a +4 bo-
nus in surprise situations).

Like other dragons, the vishap has excellent sight, smell, and
hearing. Its senses allow it to detect invisible creatures or objects
in a 10' radius per age category. Vishaps are adept linguists; they
can fluently speak Midani of Zakhara, and up to five additional
languages.

Unlike their western cousins, vishaps have no clairaudience
ability with respect to their lairs; they have no breath weapon
nor can they cast spells. They exude no dragon fear. A vishap
must survive by its wits alone. Given their penchant for destruc-
tion, however, most lead short, violent lives.

Combat: Using their camouflage ability, vishaps will watch a
potential target for days, learning its strengths and weaknesses
before attacking. After a vishap has surveyed its target, it will
usually approach to speak with its target. Weak, fearful victims
are immediately attacked. Weak victims that flatter the vishap

 

 

 

 

 

HD MR Treasure XP Value
2 Nil Nil 420
4 Nil Nil 975
6 Nil Nil 3,000
8 Nil Nil 5,000
9 5% D 8,000
10 10% D,Y,U 11,000
11 15% D,Y,U 12,000
12 20% DY,U, 14,000
13 25% D,Y,Ux2 15,000
14 30% D,Y,Ux2 16,000
15 35% D,Y,Ux2 17,000
16 40% D,Y,Ux3 18,000

might be spared if they swear to yield all treasure or serve the
vishap as slaves. Victims who display a willingness for combat
will be left alone after the interview and attacked at a later date
when they can be caught by surprise.

A vishap can physically attack one creature with its teeth and
claws; it can also lash its tail at up to four man-sized creatures,
doing 2d4 points (base damage) to each victim. Victims must
make a Dexterity check or lose their footing and be unable to
attack during the subsequent round.

Vishaps are immune to all enchantment/charm spells from
birth. As they age, they gain the following additional powers:
Young: sleep 2/day; Juvenile: invisibility 1/day; Adult: sugges-
tion 1/day; Very old: charm monster 1/day; Venerable: unde-
tectable lie 1/day.

Habitat/Society: These dragons lair in shallow, open caverns
where they have a commanding view of the approach and entry.
Vishaps will always have at least one secret plan of escape
should they be cornered in their lair.

Ecology: Vishaps are carnivores, although they may stoop to
eating carrion or plants in order to survive. They greatly relish
human and demihuman flesh. Vishaps have been known to
work together and enslave entire villages, thriving on the vil-
lagers’ fear-induced worship.
Zaratan

MC13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tropical/Fresh and salt water
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: See below
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: -6/0
MOVEMENT: 1, Sw 2

HIT DICE: 51-70
THACO: 5

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 10-100
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Swallow

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Immune to poison, magic

weapon needed to pierce shell

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: G (200-350’ diameter)
MORALE: Fearless (19)

LEVEL/XP VALUE: 46,000 + 1,000 per HD over 51

The zaratan is an enormous, passive turtle found in the warm
currents of Zakhara’s seas. Thankfully, the zaratan spends most
of its existence in a profoundly deep slumber.

The shell of a zaratan (plural, zaratani) looks like a sloped,
rocky mound several hundred feet in diameter. The zaratan’s
head, over 50 feet across, is often mistaken for a partially-
submerged, barnacle-encrusted boulder. The zaratan usually
keeps its eyes shut, covered with stony lids that blend with the
rest of its head in texture and color. The zaratan’s four flippers,
each over a hundred feet long, appear to be small reefs, support-
ing a variety of corals, barnacles, and small fish. The zaratan’s
rocky shell is considered AC -6, while its head and flippers are
only AC 0. In its dormant state, a zaratan appears to be a small,
floating island.

Combat: More often than not, once wakened from its slumber, a
zaratan will react to an enemy by withdrawing into its rocklike
shell, against which nonmagical weapons have absolutely no ef-
fect. In addition, no known poison will affect a zaratan with its
incredibly slow metabolism. A zaratan will remain in its shell
for 1-10 years (if not further provoked) before re-emerging.

However, if pestered and wounded for more than 5% of its
total hit points, a zaratan becomes a terrible opponent. Al-
though it attacks last in every round, a single bite from its 40’
maw delivers 10-100 points of damage and will swallow any be-
ings within a 10’ radius of its target (no save), should its attack
roll succeed by 4 more than needed.

The stomach of a zaratan is a tough, tube-shaped cave. Usu-
ally there is enough stale, trapped air for a creature to survive
indefinitely (if they survived the bite attack), but creatures
trapped within also suffer 2 points of damage per day unless
they can figure out a way to protect themselves from the stom-
ach’s corrosive digestive juices. The stomach lining is AC 5.
Damage equal to 5% of the zaratan’s total hit points (a case of
painful indigestion) will result in the victims’ regurgitation. A
zaratan’s stomach might contain just about anything, depending
upon the whim of the DM, from pieces of driftwood and chunks
of ships, to weapons, armor, and even a small amount of trea-
sure (suggested type Z).

After a battle, a zaratan will immediately fall into a deep
slumber, which typically lasts 1-100 years.

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: The slow metabolism of the zaratani assure
them incredibly long (if uneventful) lives, measured in millen-
nia. The zaratani are said to have been floating in the sea long
before the genies first visited the Land of Fate.

At any given time, a zaratan is 99% likely to be sleeping. As it
slumbers, it keeps its mouth wide open. Any small to man-sized
creatures stupid enough to swim inside (large fish mostly) are
reflexively swallowed. The zaratan spends the rest of its time
either mating or conversing with others of its own kind.

Every few centuries, by sheer coincidence, a pair of zaratani
will drift into each other. Should they awake (and be of the op-
posite sex), they will mate. The courtship ritual may take dec-
ades, and the mating itself lasts as long as a year.

The zaratani communicate with one another in a language
similar to that of the whales. Conversations between the zara-
tani often last decades. On rare occasions, they have been
known to communicate with other beings via telepathy.

Ecology: The older a zaratan gets, the longer it sleeps. As a re-
sult, many actually become indistinguishable from a floating is-
land or reef, supporting their own mini-ecosystems on their
broad, rocky carapaces and underbellies. Many sport stunted
palm trees and vegetation on their shells.

The older and wiser zaratani are perfectly content to be at-
tended by lesser symbiotic beings, provided the symbiotes are
not too bothersome and don’t interfere with a zaratan’s sleep. A
few are known to support small, uncivilized villages, while oth-
ers have even been used as a mobile base for pirates and cor-
sairs!

Visitors will find most inhabitants of a zaratan highly super-
stitious. Many revere their island home as a god. They believe
(rightly) that were their deity to awaken due to hunger, their
island might sink beneath the sea, destroying their village. As a
result, these villagers strive at every opportunity to keep the
zaratan well-fed and content, sacrificing large quantities of
caught fish and even visitors to placate their floating deity.

©1992 TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Zin

MC13

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Freshwater rivers and lakes
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Bands

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: High to Genius (13-18)
TREASURE: WwW

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1-6

ARMOR CLASS: 5

MOVEMENT: 12, Sw 12

HIT DICE: 5+1

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Poison

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 30%

SIZE:
MORALE:
LEVEL/XP VALUE:

M (6-12’ long)
Average (10)
2,000

The zin are spirit snakes that dwell at the bottom of rivers and
lakes. They are shapeshifting, bardic pranksters, delighting in
spreading merriment, song, and mischief among the surface
dwellers that travel near or across their domains.

In their true form, zin look like pale blue or green snakes.
Along their backs, the scales depict a mottled blue and green
mosaic pattern, unique to each individual zin. Their coloration
makes them difficult to spot while swimming, but they can easi-
ly be spotted while resting on a river or lake bed.

Combat: Zin all have 60’ infravision. They can polymorph into
human or demihuman form at will and are most often encoun-
tered in this form. The zin each possess the talents and spell abil-
ities of a 5th-level bard, with either the sa’luk, rawun, or barber
kits. They can learn four wizard spells (three 1st-level and one
2nd-level), typically choosing from the enchantment/ charm
and illusion schools (ventriloquism and Tasha’s uncontrollable
hideous laughter are long-standing zin favorites). Zin equip
themselves with the accoutrement typical of a traveling bard.
They delight in using magical items.

Although each individual zin possesses a bardic voice, when
they play and sing together as a band, their music takes on a
supernatural quality that it did not possess before. In order for
this eldritch music to be effective, the zin must be within 10 feet
of one another. Spells “cast” by a band are extremely difficult to
resist (-1 on saves per zin present) and depend upon the num-
ber of zin in the band (per the following table).

Duo: hold person or suggestion

Trio: charm monster or emotion

Quartet: Leomund's lamentable belaborment or chaos
Quintet: mass suggestion or charm plants

Sextet: demand or Otto’s irresistible dance

The spell “repertoire” is cumulative (i.e., a quartet knows the
spells of a trio and duo). A zin band can collectively cast any
spell from their repertoire, once per round, at a level equal to
three times the number of zin present.

In their natural form, zin can physically attack with their bite.
The victim suffers 1-6 points of damage and must save vs. poi-
son or fall into a catatonic slumber for 24 hours. Upon awaken-
ing, the unfortunate will most likely find himself completely

 

 

 

 

 

naked and probably (if the zin have a malicious streak) danger-
ously close to the lair of an unpleasant monster.

Habitat/Society: Bands of zin dwell together in air-filled caverns
at the bottom of rivers and lakes. They are carnivores, subsist-
ing mainly on a diet of fish.

When bored, a group of zin will approach a camp of travelers
passing nearby and ask for protection for the night. During their
visit, the zin will stretch the limits of the PCs’ hospitality with
bawdy jokes and a few pranks. If the hosts retain their compo-
sure, the zin will perform a small concert in their honor, casting
all of the spells in their repertoire to achieve the most humorous
and entertaining results (from the point of view of the zin, that
is).

Should the hosts adhere to the code of hospitality, they will
have at last earned the respect of the zin, who will lavish on
them a concert of merriment, song, and mirth lasting the re-
mainder of the evening. In the morning, the zin will wish their
hosts luck and long life and trouble them no further.

If the hosts are offended by the zin’s antics and betray the sa-
cred trust of hospitality (by attacking one of the zin), the band
will attempt to flee into the darkness and plague the party for
the remainder of their journey with a nightly concert. At the
DM’s discretion, on their final nightly visit, the zin will curse
their poor hosts with the evil eye (no saving throw).

Ecology: Zin only care about music, dancing, and having a
good time (frequently at the expense of others). They have little
concern for the world around them or its ecology, although they
will quickly take offense at anything defiling the body of water
in which they live.

The hide of a zin is highly prized by all rogues. Zin-hide san-
dals will increase a rogue’s chances of climbing walls and mov-
ing silently by 10%. Of course, openly wearing such sandals
will earn a rogue the immediate enmity of most zin encountered
thereafter (-10 on reaction rolls), who might decide they want
a pair of sandals made from the rogue’s skin.
TABLE 1: APPROPRIATE MONSTERS LIST

MC13

 

 

This section lists monsters from the previous volumes of the Monstrous Compendium that are appropriate for the AL-QADIM™
campaign. “Name” refers to the creature in question, “Section” refers to the entry in which the creature is found, and “Comp.” refers
to the volume of the Compendium in which the entry is found (“MC1” and “MC2” refer to Parts 1 & 2 of the compendium; “FR1”
refers to the first FORGOTTEN REALMS® appendix (MC3); “FR2” refers to the second FORGOTTEN REALMS appendix (MC11);
“DL” refers to the DRAGONLANCE® Appendix; “GH” refers to the GREYHAWK® appendix; “OP” refers to the Outer Planes

appendix; and “Psi” refers to the Complete Psionics Handbook).

Section
Anenome, giant
Animal, Herd

Ant

Ant Lion, Giant
Ape, Carnivorous
Baboon

Baku

Bat

Bear

Beetle

Boar
Bonesnapper
Bunyip

Cats, Great

Centipede
Chimera
Cockatrice
Crocodile
Crustacean, Giant
Dogs
Dolphin
Dragonne
Eagle

Eel
Elemental
Elephant
Ettin
Genie
Ghost
Ghoul
Giant-kin
Hag

Har
Hatoti
Hawk

Haunt
Hornet
Horse
Hyena
Jackal

Name(s)

Camel, Cattle,
Antelope, Sheep
Giant

Wild

Common, Giant
Black

Fire

Wild

Cheetah, Jaguar, Leopard,
Lion, Tiger
Giant, Huge, Megalo-

Crocodile, giant crocodile
Giant crab, giant crayfish
Wild, blink, death

Wild, giant

All types

Air, earth, fire, water
African

Jann, marid, djinn, dao, efreet

Ghoul, lacedon, ghast
Cyclops
Annis, green, sea

Large, small (falcon),
blood hawk

Hornet, Wasp
Light, pony, wild, riding, mule
Hyena

Comp.
DL

MCl1
MC2
MC2
MC2
MC2
Psi
MCl1
MCl1
MC2
MCl1
GH
FR1

MC1
MCl1
MCl1
MC1
MC2
MC2
MC1
MC2
MC2
MC2
MC2
MCl1
MCl1
MC2
MC1
MC1
MC1
MC2
MC2
MC1

MC2
MC2
MC1
MC1
MC1
MC1

Section
Lamia
Lammasu
Lich
Lizard
Manticore
Mummy
Naga
Nereid
Night hag
Nightmare
Nymph
Octopus
Ogre
Owl
Plant, carnivorous
Rakshasa
Rat

Ray
Rhaumbusun
Roc
Sandling
Scorpion
Sea Lion
Shadow
Shark
Shedu
Skeleton
Snake
Spectre
Sphinx

Spider
Squid, Giant
Tempest
Thylacine
Turtle

Tyr
Vampire
Vulture
Water weird
Whale
Wolf
Zombie

Name(s)
Lesser, greater

Fire, giant, minotaur

Guardian, spirit, water

Ogre, ogre mage
Common, giant, talking
Cactus, vampire
Rakshasa, greater rakshasa
Common, giant

Manta, pungi, sting

Large, huge, giant

Common

Lesser, greater
Skeleton, monster
All types

Androsphinx, criosphinx,

gynosphinx, hieracosphinx
All types

Sea, giant and snapping, giant

All types

Common, killer
Common, dire
Common

Comp.
MC2
MC2
MC1
MCI
MC1
MC1
MC2
MC2

OP
OP
MC1
MC2
MC1
MC1
GH
MC1
MC1
MC1
FR1
MC2
MC2
MC1
MC2
MCI
MC2
Psi
MC1
MC1
MC1

MC2
MCl1
MC2
FR2
FRI
GH
GH
MC1
FRI
MC2
MCl1
MCl1
MC1
ENCOUNTER TABLES

 

 

LAND-BASED ENCOUNTERS

Deep Desert

Djinn or efreeti

Dao or jann

Hyena or ghost-mount

Scorpion, large or huge

Vulture, normal or centaur, desert
Bandit or dog, wild

Debbi or wolf

Horse or camel, desert

Lion, or camel, dromedary
Nomad or pilgrim

Herd animal or jackal

Mason wasp, giant or Maskhi
Ogre or hatori

Snake, giant poisonous or vishap
Silat, young or great ghul
Snake, constrictor or poison
Ogre, giant or giant, desert

DM’s Special

DM’s Special

Desert Border

WMYRNOR EN

11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

Plain or

Oo COMI OT HE WP

11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

Camel, dromedary or desert
Ghost-mount or hatori
Mason wasp, giant or harpy
Merchant caravan or great ghul
Nomads or centaur, desert
Spider, huge or large

Horse or herd animal

Lion or debbi

Merchant caravan

Jackal or vulture, normal
Patrol or fire beetle

Ogre or heway

Pilgrim or owl

Bandit or wolf

NPC party or silat, young
Lycanthrope, werehyena
Vishap or harpy

DM’s Special

DM's Special

Scrub

Boar, wild or tiger

Dog, wild or debbi

Elephant, African or ghost-mount
Genie, tasked, herdsman or harpy
Hyena or lycanthrope, were-lion
Bandit, nomad, or pilgrim
Scorpion or bat, large or huge
Spider, huge or large

Vulture, normal or horse

Herd animal or baboon

Snake, constrictor or poison

Lion or centaur, desert
Lycanthrope, werehyena or ogre
Mason wasp, giant or jackal
Ghoul or maskhi

Snake, giant poisonous

Silat, young or ant-lion, giant
DM’s Special

DM's Special

Rough or Hill

2 Ammut or copper automaton
3 Herd animal or dwarf, hill

4 Vishap or harpy

5 Ogre or mule

6 Spider, large or huge

7 Vulture, normal

8 Debbi or owl

9 Bandit or fire beetle

10 Tiger or dog, wild

11 Lion or wolf

12 Nomad or bat, common

13 Scorpion, large or wasp, giant
14 Silat, young or ant-lion, giant
15 Snake, constrictor or poison
16 Baboon or elephant, African
17 Boar, warthog or wild

18 Genie, tasked winemaker

19 DM's Special

20 DM's Special

Mountain

2 Dwarf, mountain

3 Genie, dao

4 Ogre or harpy

5 Spider, large or huge

6 Vulture, normal or great ghul
7 Bandit or pilgrim

8 Cockatrice or bat, common

9 Debbi or fire beetle

10 Scorpion, huge or large

11 Ghoul or wolf

12 Herd animal or dog, wild

13 Lion or tiger

14 Manticore or falcon, small
15 Silat, young or ant-lion, giant
16 Snake, constrictor or poison
17 Snake, giant poisonous

18 Yak men

19 DM's Special

20 DM's Special

Forest

2 Boar, warthog or wild

3 Elf or lycanthrope, were-lion
4 Dog, wild or wolf

5 Elephant, African or ashira

6 Ogre or elephant bird

7 Hornet, giant

8 Debbi or horse

9 Jaguar or owl

10 Giant, jungle or fire beetle

11 Lion or tiger

12 Baboon or leopard

13 Pilgrim or bat, common

14 Scorpion, large or huge

15 Silat, young or ape, carnivorous
16 Snake, constrictor or poison
17 Snake, giant constrictor or poison
18 Spider, giant or huge

19 DM's Special

20 DM's Special

Inhabited or Patrolled Areas

Wilderness Table
Lycanthrope, were-hyena
Lycanthrope, were-lion
NPC party

Pilgrim or traveler
Freeman or peasant
Freeman or peasant
Patrol or fire beetle

Silat, young

Nomad or raider
Merchant

Merchant

Bandit or wolf

Herd animal

Boar, wild

Ogre

Genie, tasked, winemaker or artist
DM's Special

DM's Special

Aerial Encounters

Sakina

Simurgh

Dragonne

Chimera

Wasp or Hornet, giant
Mason wasp, giant or harpy
Serpent, winged or roc
Genie (djinn or efreet)
Elephant birds or vulture, normal
Ogre mage or maskhi
Common bird or owl

Eagle or falcon

Lammasu or shedu

Roc, great

Common bird or bat

Buraq or hama

Roc, two-headed

DM's Special

DM's Special

NPC parties in the wilderness will often

be near to the adventuring group in num-
ber, level, and equipment. Otherwise, the
typical NPC party will be 7th to 10th
level, with henchmen of approximately
half (round up) character level. Such par-
ties are 90% likely to be mounted (See
“NPC parties” in MC2).

 
ENCOUNTER TABLES

 

DM Special Table

A special encounter can also be a natural
hazard (either a gale at sea, or a sandstorm on
the desert) or an encounter with a known NPC.

01-02 Ammut

03-04 Asuras

05-06 Baku

07 Black cloud of vengeance
08-09 Buraq

10-12. Camel of the pearl

13 Copper Automaton
14-16 Genie, dao

17-19 Genie, djinn

20-22 Genie, efreet

23-25 Genie, marid

26 Genie, noble dao

27 Genie, noble djinn

28 Genie, noble efreet

29 Genie, noble marid
30-31 Genie, tasked, architect/builder
32-33 Genie, tasked, artist
34-35 Genie, tasked, guardian
36 Genie, tasked, slayer
37 Genie, tasked, warmonger
38-39 Genie, tasked, winemaker
40-42 Ghul, great

43 Ghost

44 Ghoul

45 Ghast

46 Ghost-mount

47 Hag, annis

48 Hag, green

49 Hama

50-52 Lammasu (10% greater)
53 Lich

54-55 Sabu lord

56-57 Living idol

58-59  Markeen

60 Mummy

61 Naga, guardian

62 Naga, spirit

63 Night hag

64 Nightmare

65 Nymph

66-67 Ogre mage

68-69 Rakshasa

70-71 Rom

72-73 Sakina

74 Serpent lord

75-77 Serpent, winged

78-80 Shedu (10% greater)
81-84 Silat, adult (10% matriarch)
85-87  Simurgh

88 Spectre

89-90 Sphinx, andro-

91 Sphinx, crio-

92 Sphinx, gyno-

93 Sphinx, hieraco-

94-95 Stone maiden

96 Tempest

97 Vampire

98-00 Vishap

AQUATIC ENCOUNTERS
Salt Water Surface

2 Shark, giant

3 Depths encounter

4 Ghost ship

5 Pahari

6 Giant, reef or island
7 Dolphin or whale

8 Seaweed or strangleweed
9 Shark or barracuda
10 Fisherman

11 Merchant

12 Pirates, small boats
13 Warship

14 Pirates, large ship

15 Turtle, giant sea

16 Hazard (navigational)
17 Crocodile, giant

18 Aerial encounter

19 DM's Special
20 DM’s Special

Salt Water Depths

2 Shark, giant

3 Squid, giant

4 Shark

5 Nereid

6 Sea hag

7 Giant, reef

8 Lacedon

9 Ray, manta
10 Fish school

11 Fish school

12 Hippocampus
13 Octopus, giant
14 Anenome, giant sea
15 Snake, sea

16 Pahari

17 Barracuda

18 Giant, reef

19 DM's Special
20 DM's Special

Fresh Water Surface
2 Depths encounter

3 Aerial encounter

4 Snake, giant constrictor
5 Crocodile, giant

6 Naga, water

7 Hazard (navigational)
8 Pirate, small boats

9

Fisherman
10 Merchant
11 Crocodile, normal
12 Seaweed
13 Bunyip
14 Water weird
15 Turtle, giant snapping
16 Spider, giant water
17 Hippopotamus
18 Crocodile, giant

19 DM's Special
20 DM's Special

Fresh Water Depths

2 Snake, giant constrictor
3 Sea weed or strangleweed
4 Crocodile, giant

5 Crab or crayfish, giant
6 Fish school

7 Fish school

8 Turtle, giant snapping
9 Eel, giant

10 Bunyip

11 Heway

12 Lacedon

13 Naga, water

14 Genie, marid

15 Nereid

16 Zin

17 Sea hag

18 Water weird

19 DM's Special

20 DM's Special

 

Aerial Land, or Depths Encounters: Roll on
the appropriate table. If the encounter is not
suitable, then none occurs.

Surface encounters: Unintelligent monsters
are 75% likely to be driven off by flaming oil
nearby, 90% if actually burned by it. Large
amounts of food thrown overboard are 50%
likely to end such an encounter.

Fish School: This is a large group of one type
of fish, the aquatic version of herd animals.
They usually do not attack, unless commanded
by magical means. If panicked, they might mill
about, obstructing vision and movement. If
large enough, they might cause buffeting dam-
age (1-2 to 1-8, depending on size).

Ghost Ship: This is a lost ship, manned by
undead. Although it can be seen at any time, it
will usually attack only at night, when its mas-
ters are at full power. Roll percentile dice once
for the crew and once for their leaders. Crew:
01-40 = 10-40 skeletons; 41-80 = 10-40 zom-
bies; 81-00 = 10-30 lacedons. Leaders: 01-30 =
1-3 spectres; 31-60 = 1-2 ghosts; 61-90 = 1-2
vampires; 91-00 = 1 lich.

Hazard (navigational): This can ground or
damage a vessel that does not have a pilot fa-
miliar with the waters. Such hazards such as
sandbars and submerged logs often change po-
sition. They can be circumvented by rolling a
successful navigation proficiency check.

Pirates, small ships: This encounter involves
1-6 small vessels, ranging in size from small
launches and outrigger canoes to barijahs. The
ships are crammed with a total of 20-120 sea-
faring thieves and fighters of Ist-3rd levels, led
by four 4th level mates, a 6th level lieutenant,
and an 8th level captain (10% chance for a 6th-
9th level wizard). Common pirates wear leath-
er armor; leaders wear chain mail. All are
armed with knives and swords; 25% also carry
bows, 50% spears, and 25% pole arms.

Pirates, large ship: This encounter involves
either a drommond (40%), great galley (40%),
or galleon (20%). The ship is crammed with
100-300 seafaring thieves and fighters of Ist-4th
levels, led by four 5th level mates, a 7th level
lieutenant, and a 10th level captain. There is a
40% chance for a 7th-10th level wizard and/or
priest (check for each). Common pirates wear
studded leather armor; leaders wear chain mail
and shield. All are armed with knives and
swords; 50% also carry bows, 25% spears, and
25% pole arms. The ship is further armed with
0-3 ballistas and catapults.

Seaweed: This includes both floating masses
of weed and beds at the bottom. The former
slow ships by 50%. The latter are 30-300’ high
and reduce vision to 10 feet. Both provide 40%
chance for another encounter if entered.
COMPILED STATISTICS TABLE

 

 

MC13
Name #AP AC MV HD THACO #AT DMG SA SD AL
Ammut 1-12 3 9Sw12, Br3 6 15 lor2 2-16 or 1-8/1-8 Yes No NE
Ashira 2-12 7 12 3 17 2 1-6/1-6 Yes Yes CG
Asuras 1(2-200) -2 12, Fl 33 (A) 8 13 3 1-10/1-10/1-8 Yes Yes CG
Black Cloud of Vengeance 1 3 FI 24 (E) 15-20 Varies 2 Varies Yes Yes CE or N
Buraq 14 4 27, F1 27 (C) 5 15 3 1-6/1-6/2-12 Yes Yes NG
Camel of the Pearl 1(2-12) 6 24 5 15 2 1-8/2-12 Yes Yes LG
Copper Automaton lor3-18 3 9 6 15 2 2-12/2-12 Yes Yes N
Centaur, Desert 1-8 or 432 6 21 3 17 3 1-4/1-4 and weapon Yes No NG or CG
Debbi 1-8 7 15, Cl 6 1+1 19 1 1-4 Yes No NE
Desert Camel (camel) 1-12 7 21 3 16 1 1-4 Yes No Nil
Dragon, Zakharan (vishap) 1(2-9) 3 (base) 18, Jp 6 8 (base) Varies 3and1  1-4/1-4/2-12 and 2-8 (base) Yes Yes NE
Elephant Bird 10-100 5 FI 18(C) 3+3 17 1or3 1-10 or 1-4/1-4/1-6 Yes NoN
Gen 1 5 9, Fl 12 (B), Sw 12 Varies Varies 1 1-6 or 2-12 Yes Yes Varies
Genie, Noble Djinn 1 1 12,Fl 36 (A) 10+3 9 1 3-24 Y Y CG
Genie, Noble Efreeti 1 1 12,FI 30 (B) 13 7 1 4-32 Y Y LE
Genie, Noble Dao 1 0 12, Fl 21 (B), Br 9 12+3 7 2 4-24 /4-24 Y Y NE
Genie, Noble Marid 1 -2 12, Fl 21 (B), Sw 30 16 5 2 8-32/8-32 Y Y Any C
Genie, Tasked, Architect 1 4 15 9 11 1 4-24 Y YN
Genie, Tasked, Artist 1 5 9 7 13 1 1-6 Y N CN
Genie, Tasked, Guardian 1 4 15 14 7 4 1-10 (x4) or by wpn +8 (x4) Y Any L
Genie, Tasked, Herdsman 1-100 6 21 3 17 lor 2 by wpn Y YN
Genie, Tasked, Slayer 1 2 24, F1 30 (B) 12 9 2or3 — 2-16/2-16 or by wpn + 9 (x3) Y NE
Genie, Tasked, Warmonger 1 4 12 7 13 1 1-10 or by wpn +4 Y Y LE
Genie, Tasked, Winemaker 1 8 12 2 19 1 1-6 or by wpn Y Y N(G)
Ghost Mount 1 5 30 3 17 3 1-8/1-8/1-6 Y Y NE
Ghul, Great 1-3 0 18 (Br 3 or Cl 12) 4 15 3 1-6/1-6/2-12 Y Y NE
Giant, Desert 2-20 1 15 13+2-4 7 1 1-10 or 2-12 + 7 Y YN
Giant, Jungle lorl6 3 15,Cl6 11+6 9 lor2 = 246+ 9or2-12+9/212+9 Y YN
Giant, Reef lorl-4 0 or -4 15, Sw 12 18+1-6 5 1 1-10 or by wpn + 10 Y YN
Hama 1 2 (7) 1,FI 30 1 20 2 13/13 Y Y Any
Heway 1-2 7 12, Sw6 1-+3 19 1 1-3 Y Y CE
King of Birds (simurgh) 1 1 3,FI 48 (A) 10+10 11 2 2-16/2-16 Yes Yes LG
Living Idols 1 4 6, 3, or nil 8-18 3 1 4-32 Yes Yes Any N
Lycanthrope, were-hyena 2-12 5 12 5+1 15 1 2-12 or by weapon Yes Yes NE
Lycanthrope, were-lion 2-8 7 15, Jp 3 6+6 15 3 1-6/1-6/2-12 Yes Yes LE
Markeen 1 7 12, Fl 18 (B) 2 19 1 1-6 or by wpn Y N ANY
Maskhi 2-40 6or0 9, as animal, or 0 4+] 17 2 1-3/1:3 or by weapon Yes Yes CN
Mason-Wasp, giant 1-2 2 6, Fl 21 (B) 6+1 15 2 4-16/ 14 Yes Yes NG
Mountain camel (camel) 1-12 7 21 3 16 1 1-4 Yes No Nil
Nasnas 3-30 6 9 2+2 17 1 by weapon +5 Yes Yes LE
Pahari 2-20 7 12, Sw 18 or Sw 24 3-6 Varies 1 by weapon or spell Yes Yes CG
Racing camel (camel) 1-12 7 24 242 16 1 1-4 Yes No Nil
Rom 1-8 1 12 15+1 2 1 1-10 +8 Yes Yes LE
Sabu Lord 1-2 3/4 12, Jp 6 8+8 13 3 1-6/1-6/2-16 Yes Yes N
Sakina 1 -4/0) FI 48 (A) 7+7 13 1 3-18 Yes Yes CG
Serpent Lord 1 -2 6 16 5 1 4-16 Yes Yes LG
Serpent, Winged 2-8 5 12,Fl 18(B) 4+4 17 1 1-4 Yes Yes N
Silat, young 1 3 15 7 10 3 8-11/8-11/9-15 Yes Yes Any C
Silat, adult 1 or 3-9 0 or -3 15 9 or 12 8 or 6 3 8-11 /8-11/9-15 Yes Yes Any C
Stone Maiden lorl4 8 12 5 15 1 by weapon or spell Yes Yes NG
War camel (camel) 1-12 7 21 343 16 2 1-6/1-6 Yes NoNil
Zaratan 1 -6/0 1,Sw2 51-70 5 1 10-100 Yes Yes N
Zin 1-6 5 12,5w12 54+1 15 1 1-6 Yes Yes CN
ee

ea EE

 

Oe ee |

 

 

 
Za

MC 13-2125
a EC Mee kl
+

 
MC13-2129

1S TSA. lac. A Pepi Addie

 
MC13-2129

be ee ee aot

 
 
Loe i
7 1,4 > -
wy eh ry ana
lant 2,17
al ie

ih

ia 4

he
ate

ort? ie
iw Fr
#
a
EF
a
; i ale a
eo

a x -
eo
AN. ai og ke
; 7 i ‘a

He
i
bl Wages f

a
*

af
ahd

a

eh
of
if)

=
at
vs au
Ori
Me eos
te
nih

re ail
ae
15
4
7

1

2

i
im
i

*

2
iy
j ;

if
pa
1
As il ele | ke
= er x y
OL i
7 - _'
=e
=
‘he

=
m Bin
i
“t

4

ut
aie

&
ce
Le

be.
ore
qn =A [eats
Sela Le)
|

=

i

4

&, ‘—
—).

ae ee

i

ST

isis med

re
ae

me UD lit
iv

ei

i

ee
ae
me | ,
can
= rey
a

ee

TAS

a
Mee

7 aty &

 
Seem alciielee ekg
alsa e eel wee ea ee
/ magically-sealed bottles. Gigantic birds
of prey roost atop unscalable mountain
eae ee eA Uae la
beneath blue waves. Alongside a world
eam ea Nee em cies
Sikicw- Mire Rol De mate al BY
| beasts and monsters.
iia= Pee ees for your Monstrous Compendium
contains 64 pages of monsters drawn from the fables of the
Middle East. The creatures in this appendix are perfect for an
AL-QADIM campaign, or for spicing up any AD&D® game desert
Soto

TSE, lee : an ee
cs et) hy | ecw rece ee ea
Lake Gara ‘ ea
ee a oh gee Aaa

Pe ie ore ce ee cE ne eel ek Be
mere ee ee nm ue Me: ee
re eee a Ea

$10.95 U.S.
Dee Ea
F6.99 1k +

T-DLE-4Z095-% N9SI

 
