 

2118

    

mae Dragons

PAL er tot

 

 
    

wT Tee Goes

ILE re

© Monstrous Compendium

- Outer Planes

Appendix

TSR, Inc.
POB 756
Lake Geneva
WI 53147

TSR, Ltd.

120 Church End, Cherry Hinton
Cambridge CB1 3LB

United Kingdom

 
Designer: J. Paul LaFountain
Developer and Editor: Timothy B. Brown

Art Coordinator: Peggy Cooper

Cover Art: Jeff Easley

Interior Art: Thomas Baxa

Typesetting: Tracey Zamagne

The designer would also like to thank Frank Walker for his
understanding of things fiendish.

This work draws heavily on material from the
ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS® Monster Manual I, Monster
Manual II, Manual of the Planes, and from the FIEND FOLIO® Tome.

 

Random House and its affiliate companies have worldwide distribution rights in the book trade for English language products of
TSR, Inc.

Distributed to the book and hobby trade in the United Kingdom by TSR, Ltd.
Distributed to the toy and hobby trade by regional distributors.

This work is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America, Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the
material or artwork herein is prohibited without the express written consent of TSR, Inc.

 
  

TSR, Inc. TSR Ltd.
POB 756 : 120 Church End, Cherry Hinton
Lake Geneva, Ie Cambridge CB1 3LB
WI 53147 USA acento United Kingdom

Copyright ©1991 TSR, Inc. All rights reserved. Printed in the U.S.A.

ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AD&D, and FIEND FOLIO are registered trademarks owned by TSR, Inc. The TSR logo
is a trademark owned by TSR, Inc.

1-56076-055-9
2118XXX1501
How To Use This Book

MC8

 

Welcome to the Monstrous Compendium volume that finally de-
tails the powerful creatures unique to the outer planes. As in pre-
vious volumes, all entries are given in alphabetical order on
removable looseleaf sheets. The looseleaf sheets can be placed in
a master binder for easy reference as needed for an adventure.

Important Note: These monster sheets should not be intermin-
gled with the monster sheets from the previous volumes of the
Monstrous Compendium series; keep all these monsters together
in a separate section of your binder.

All monsters included here are typical for their type. Variations
of your own design are encouraged.

CLIMATE/TERRAIN—defines where the creature is most often
found. Normally, climates include things such as arctic, subarc-
tic, temperate, and tropical, and terrain would include plain/
scrub, forest, rough/hill, mountain, swamp, and desert.
However, in the outer planes, these terms tend to have less mean-
ing. Therefore, this category will define which plane (or planes)
the creature is native to.

FREQUENCY — is the likelihood of encountering a creature in an
area. Very rare is a 4% chance, rare is 11%, uncommon is 20%,
and common is a 65% chance. Chances can be adjusted for spe-
cial areas.

ORGANIZATION—is the general social structure the monster
adopts. “Solitary” includes small familial groups.

ACTIVITY CYCLE—is the time of day when the monster is most
active. Those most active at night may be active at any time in
subterranean settings. Active cycle is a general guide and excep-
tions are fairly common. Also, keep in mind that in the outer
planes, this category, too, might yield to unusual circumstances.

DIET—shows what the creature generally eats. Carnivores eat
meat, herbivores eat plants, and omnivores eat either. Scavengers
dine mainly on carrion.

INTELLIGENCE—is the equivalent of human “IQ.” Certain mon-
sters are instinctively cunning; these are noted in the monster de-
scriptions. Ratings correspond roughly to the following
Intelligence ability scores:

0 Non-intelligent or not ratable
1 Animal intelligence
2-4 Semi-intelligent
5-7 Low intelligence
8-10 Average (human) intelligence
11-12 Very intelligent
13-14 Highly intelligent
15-16 Exceptionally intelligent
17-18 Genius
19-20 Supra-genius
21+ Godlike intelligence

TREASURE—refers to the treasure tables in the Dungeon Mas-
ters Guide. If individual treasure is indicated, each individual
may carry it (or not, at the DM's discretion). Major treasures are
usually found in the monster's lair; these are most often designed
and placed by the DM. Intelligent monsters will use magical items
present and try to carry off their most valuable treasures if hard
pressed. If treasure is assigned randomly, roll for each type possi-
ble: if all rolls fail, no treasure of any type is found. Treasure
should be adjusted downward if few monsters are encountered.
Large treasures are noted by a parenthetical multiplier (* 10,
etc.)—not to be confused with treasure type X. Do not use the ta-
bles to place dungeon treasure, as numbers encountered under-

ground will be much smaller.

ALIGNMENT—shows the general behavior of the average mon-

ster of that type. Exceptions, though uncommon, may be encoun-
tered,

NO. APPEARING—indicates an average encounter size for a
home plane encounter. The DM should alter this to fit the circum-
stances as the need arises. This should not be used for dungeon
encounters.

ARMOR CLASS—is the general protection worn by humans and
humanoids, protection due to physical structure or magical na-
ture, or difficulty in hitting due to speed, reflexes, etc. Humans
and humanoids of roughly man-size that wear armor will have an
unarmored rating in parenthesis. Listed ACs do not include any
special bonuses noted in the description.

MOVEMENT-—shows the relative speed rating of the creature.
Higher speeds may be possible for short periods. Human, demi-
human, and humanoid movement rates are often determined by
armor type (unarmored rates are given in parentheses). Move-
ments in different mediums are abbreviated as follows: Fl = fly-
ing, Sw = swimming, Br = burrowing, Wb = moving in a web.
Flying creatures also have a Maneuverability Class from A to E
(refer to the Aerial Combat rules in the Dungeon Master's Guide,
page 77).

HIT DICE—control the number of hit points of damage a crea-
ture can withstand before being killed. Unless otherwise stated,
hit dice are 8-sided, yielding 1 to 8 cumulative hit points each.
The hit dice are rolled and the numbers shown are added to deter-
mine the monster's hit points. Some monsters will have a hit point
spread instead of hit dice, and some will have additional points
added to their hit dice. Thus, a creature with 4+4 hit dice has
4d8 +4 hit points (8-36 total). Note that creatures with +3 or
more added to their hit points are considered of the next higher hit
die for purposes of attack rolls and saving throws.

THAC0—is the attack roll the monster needs to hit armor class 0.
This is always a function of hit dice, with any exceptions men-
tioned in the text description of the creature. Humans and demi-
humans always use player character THACOs, regardless of
whether they are player characters or “monsters.” THACOs do
not include any special bonuses noted in the descriptions. Hit
probability bonuses due to strength are listed in parenthesis with
the THACO.

NO. OF ATTACKS—shows the basic attacks the monster can
make in a melee round, excluding special attacks. This number
may be modified by hits that sever members, spells such as haste
and slow, and so forth. Multiple attacks indicate several attack-
ing arms, raking paws, multiple heads, etc.

DAMAGE/ATTACK—shows the amount of damage a given at-
tack will make, expressed as a spread of hit points (dice roll com-
binations). If the monster uses weapons, the damage done by the
typical weapon will be followed by the parenthetical note
“weapon.” Damage bonuses due to Strength are listed as a bonus
following the damage range.

SPECIAL ATTACKS—detail attack modes such as dragon breath,
magic use, etc. These are explained in the monster description.

SPECIAL DEFENSES—are precisely that, and are detailed in the
monster description.
How To Use This Book

MC8

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE—is the percentage chance that magic cast
upon the creature will fail to affect it, even if other creatures
nearby are affected. If the magic penetrates this resistance, the
creature is still entitled to any normal saving throws allowed.

SIZE—is abbreviated as: “T” = tiny (2’ tall or less), “S” = smaller
than a typical human (2 +' to 4’), “M" = man-sized (4+' to 7’);
“L’ = larger than man-sized (7 +' to 12'), “H" = huge (12 +’ to
25’), and “G" = gargantuan (25 +’).

MORALE —is a general rating of how likely the monster is to per-
severe in the face of adversity or armed opposition. This guide-
line may be adjusted for individual circumstances. Morale ratings
correspond to the following 2-20 range:

2-4 Unreliable

5-7. Unsteady
8-10 Average
11-12 Steady
13-14 Elite
15-16 Champion
17-18 Fanatic
19-20 Fearless

XP VALUE—is the number of experience points awarded for de-
feating (not necessarily killing) the monster. This value is a guide-
line that may be modified by the DM for the degree of challenge,

encounter situation, and for overall campaign balance. For the we
creatures in this appendix, additional experience point awards
have been calculated on the basis of extraordinary spell use, spell-

like abilities, and exceptional magic resistance.

COMBAT —discusses special combat abilities, arms, armor, and
tactics.

With the combat abilities are listed any spell-like abilities pecu-
liar to the outer planar creature. Spell-like abilities are identical to
the effects of the spell given. Where not stated, these spell-like
abilities are cast at 12th level of magic use. Since the spell-like
abilities of outer planar creatures are not spells, they do not re-
quire verbal, somatic, nor material components, and do not re-
quire concentration to maintain their effects, even in cases where
the spell’s description says otherwise.

HABITAT/SOCIETY — outlines the monster's general behavior,
nature, social structure, and goals. @
ECOLOGY —describes how the monster fits into the campaign
world, gives useful products or byproducts of the creature, and
presents other miscellaneous information.

Close variations of a monster are given in a special section after
the main monster entry. These minor listings can be found by
consulting the index to find the major listing.

 

Alphabetical Index To Outer Planes Appendix

 

Name Plane Name Plane Name Plane

aasimon (ASS-eh-mun) upper planes deva (DEE-vuh) upper planes mortai (MOR-tie) Beastlands

baatezu (bay-AT-eh-zoo) The Nine Hells dragon, adamantite Twin Paradises nabassu (NAH-bah-soo) The Abyss

tanar'ri (teh-NAH-ree) The Abyss dretch (DRECH) The Abyss nalfeshnee

yugoloth (YOU-go-loth) lower planes enheriar (nal-FESH-nee) The Abyss
(en-HARE-ee-ahr) upper planes night hag lower planes

The Nine Hells

   
 

abishai (AB-ish-eye)

    
 
 

(gla-BREET-soo)

arcanaloth —

 
    

erinyes (air-in-yes) The Nine Hells

   

   
   

ightmare (NITE-mare) lower planes

 

 
 
   

Elysium

The Abyss phoenix
(are-KAN-uh-loth) lower planes hamatula piscoloth (PIS-ko-loth) lower planes
archon (ARE-kon) Seven Heavens (hah-mah-CHOO-luh) The Nine Hells pit fiend The Nine Hells
babau (buh-BAY-yoo) The Abyss hezrou (HETZ-row) The Abyss planetar (PLAN-eh-tar) upper planes
balaena (bal-uh-EE-nuh) upper planes hordling (HORD-ling) Hades rutterkin (RUT-er-kin) The Abyss

The Abyss Limbo

         
   

         

balor (BAL-ore) hydroloth (HI-dro-loth) lower planes

slaad (SLAHD)

 

     

SES (KAM-bee-on) The Abyss arut (muh-ROOT) = <a ultroloth (UL-truh-loth) lower planes

 

celestial lammasu mediator vaporighu

(LAM-uh-soo) Olympus (MEE-dee-ate-or) Nirvana (VAH-por-ee-goo) Gehenna
chasme (KAZ-me) The Abyss mezzoloth vrock (VROK) The Abyss
cornugon (METZ-oh-loth) lower planes warden beast Beastlands
(KORN-yoo-gon) The Nine Hells molydeus yagnoloth

dergholoth (mol-EE-dee-us) The Abyss (YAG-nuh-loth) lower planes
(DUR-goh-loth) lower planes moon dog Elysium zoveri (ZO-ver-ee) Seven Heavens

 

 
The Outer Planes

MCS8

 

 

This monstrous compendium deals with the natives of the outer
planes, concentrating on the denizens of the lower planes most
likely to oppose adventuring parties.

The outer planes themselves are accessed only by traveling
through the barren nothingness of the Astral plane. There are no
connections directly between the outer and Prime Material
planes. There are several ways to travel through the Astral plane,
but those most common to adventurers are the gate and plane
shift spells.

Once the outer planes are reached, the traveler is confronted

with a great many choices. There are a variety of outer planes,
each with a variety of terrain and a predominant alignment.
Of the 17 outer planes, seven are upper planes, seven are lower
planes, and the remaining three are middle planes. Although in
the broadest terms, each plane corresponds to an alignment, it is
more complex than that. After all, there are only nine alignments
and 17 planes. The differences between the planes are much more
subtle than mortals are used to. As an example, the plane of Arca-
dia is the domain of the neutral good lawfuls. This is a very subtle
shade of neutral good that is not readily recognized in the planar
domain of mortals. In the home of the gods, however, such sub-
tleties are readily apparent. As a general rule, when a native of
the Prime Material plane dies, his essence travels to the plane cor-
responding to how he acted in life (another—and perhaps least
preferred—method of traveling to the outer planes).

The Upper Planes

Arcadia: Arcadia is the plane of well-ordered law for the com-
mon good, a plane where organization and hierarchies are used as
tools with beneficial ends. Its realms are huge fields of well-
tended crops and orchards, cities laid out in geometrically perfect
shapes, and mountains unblemished by erosion. There is day and
night in Arcadia, dictated by a great sphere set into the highest
peak of the land. This sphere is half radiant and half black, as if
portions of the Positive and Negative Material planes had been
brought together. Arcadia has three layers, though the upper
reaches have not been explored—its contents are not common
knowledge.

Seven Heavens: The Seven Heavens epitomize the ultimate in
goodness tempered by law and justice operating with mercy.
They are also called the Seven Mountains of Goodness and Law.
The plane ascends in mountainous magesty from the first layer to
the seventh. The planes of the Seven Heavens are Lunia, Mercu-
ria, Venya, Solania, Mertion, Jovar, and Chronias.

Twin Paradises: The Twin Paradises are the homes of those
spirits and powers that are good by their own choice. The best
way to understand the layout of the Twin Paradises is to picture a
book with no pages. The insides of the two covers are the surfaces
of the two layers, facing each other. A traveler standing in one of
the layers can look up and see the other layer hanging overhead
(and upside down, from the traveler's perspective). The two lay-
ers of the Twin Paradises are Dothion and Shurrock.

Elysium: Elysium is a plane of ultimate good, unsullied by the
concerns of hierarchy or anarchy. The spirits that reside here can-
not be summoned or controlled, for they have achieved their final
rest. The lands of Elysium are fertile along the banks of the
mighty river Oceanus, covered with pines and sweet-smelling
flowering trees. Elysium consists of four layers: Amoria, Eronia,
Belierin, and Thalasia.

Beastlands: The Beastlands (known to some cultures as the
Happy Hunting Grounds) is a triple-layered plane of neutral good
in all its vibrant diversity. It is a densely forested plane in all its
layers, though its forests vary from giant cycads to pines, from
sequoias to oaks, from beeches to birches, and to more alien re-
gions with huge expanses of hanging moss and vast regions of gi-
ant fungi and mushrooms. The three layers of the Beastlands are

Krigala, Brux, and Karasuthra.

Olympus: Olympus is a plane of chaotic good, home to a pow-
erful and organized pantheon of powers. The three layers of Oly-
mpus are Olympus, Ossa, and Pelion. The first layer is the most
hospitable; Ossa and Pelion are layers of water and dust lands,
respectively.

Gladsheim: The plane of Gladsheim, like that of Olympus, is a
chaotic plane that is home to a powerful, organized pantheon of
beings—of nordic manner, who gave the plane and its layers their
commonly used names. Each layer of Gladsheim consists of a
number of shifting rivers of earth that form vast arches through
the empty space between them. These rivers, millions of miles
wide, are in turn made of huge chunks of inhabitable earth and
other matter that move and shift against each other, like blocks of
ice in a frozen river. The common names for the three layers of
Gladsheim are Asgard, Muspelheim, and Nidavellir.

The Middle Planes

Nirvana: Nirvana is the plane of ultimate law, a perfectly regi-
mented order. It consists of equal measures of light and dark,
equal proportions of heat and cold, and equal parts of the four el-
ements. It is a single, infinite plane with planar layers that extend
in all directions, without a true floor or ceiling. The void is filled,
however, with huge interlocking wheels, like the internal cogs of
an ornately carved clock. These wheels are great platters of mat-
ter, each 1,000 miles or more in diameter.

Limbo: Limbo is the plane of chaos supreme, at the antipode of
organized Nirvana. It is a twisting, quicksilver place, prone to
manipulation and subjugation by the powers that make it their
home. Unlike the elemental planes, Limbo is a mishmash of the
primal forces of air, fire, earth, and water. The terrain of Limbo is
a hodgepodge of bits and pieces of boulders, trees, and entire
landscapes being swept up in a torrent of water and other murky
liquids, buffeted by strong winds and encapsulated in pockets of
foul air.

The Outer Planes

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
The Outer Planes

Concordant Opposition: The plane of Concordant Opposition
is the exception to many of the rules and assumptions concerning
the outer planes. It does not coincide with the great wheel cosmol-
ogy of the aligned planes. Despite that, creatures from every
outer plane and the Astral can be found in Concordant Opposi-
tion, for it connects with all these planes. Concordant Opposition
mixes the properties of all the planes it touches. It is limitless, yet
unlike any of the outer planes, it has a definite center. It changes
from moment to moment like chaos, yet always maintains the
same sense of order and placement. There are no races native to
the plane of Concordant Opposition.

The Lower Planes

Pandemonium: Pandemonium is an underground realm, a
great mass of matter pierced by innumerable tunnels carved by
the powerful, howling winds. It is the plane of chaos tinged with
evil, in many ways the opposite of Gladsheim. Whereas the upper
realm consists of great spaces of air spanned by huge earthen riv-
ers, the lands of Pandemonium are huge dark caverns filled with
continual gales. The four windy, noisy, and dark layers of the
plane are Pandesmos, Cocytus, Phlegethon, and Agathion.

The Abyss: The number of layers of the Abyss are inestimable;
they certainly comprise most layers and therefore potentially the
most inhabitants of any of the outer planes. No sage or scholar
claims to have visited or catalogued each of the layers. The Abyss
combines all that is evil with all that is chaotic to produce an ugly,
violent plane where the strong survive only on the backs of the
weak —it is also known as Jurgarten, the misshapen lands. It is the
birthplace of the foul tanar'ri. The only layer of the Abyss that is
well known is the first layer, known as Pazunia, the Plains of Infi-
nite Portals, or the Palace of 1,001 Closets. It is a barren, dusty
place without life or greenery, baking beneath a blistering, red
sun. Its dusty plains are broken by three features: huge holes in
the ground, great iron portals, and the river Styx.

Tarterus: The sixfold layers of Tarterus are a fell region inhab-
ited by monsters and great evil beasts. It is the home of many evil
powers in exile and creatures planning their revenge against oth-
ers. The layers of Tarterus are laid out like strings of huge crimson
pearls, each pear] the size of a Prime Material world. The surfaces
of these world-sized pearls vary according to the layer, yet all
give off a dull, reddish glow from their soil, similar to the phos-
phorescence of fire beetles. The space between these worlds is
filled with air, so that travelers can fly from world to world in rel-
ative safety. The six layers of Tarterus are Othrys, Cathrys,
Minethys, Colothys, Porphatys, and Agathys.

Hades: Hades, the plane of evil balanced between law and
chaos, is one of the most accessible of the lower planes. Not only
is it the midpoint of the Styx, which links the lower planes in a
continuous river of evil, but it is also the foundation of Mount
Olympus and the base of the Yggdrasil, the World Ash that
reaches Gladsheim. The layers of Hades are referred to as its
glooms. These are realms without joy or emotion, without hope
or peace, and without good will or intentions. They are gray
lands with a gray skies. Any colors but muted blacks and whites
stand out here. There is neither sun, moon, stars, nor the com-
forting passing of the seasons. There is merely a state of waiting,
with no end to the waiting in sight. The glooms of Hades are
Oinos, Niflheim, and Pluton.

Gehenna: The fourfold furnaces of Gehenna are smoky, burn-
ing realms. The ground provides light, similar to the pearls of
Tarterus, and heat as well. Many realms will burn creatures and
cause unprotected flammable items to burst into flames. The lay-
ers of Gehenna are mountains without bases or peaks, and every-
thing is built onto or carved into the sides of these mountains. The
four layers of Gehenna are Khalas, Chamada, Mungoth, and
Krangath.

MC8

The Nine Hells: Of all the outer planes, the Nine Hells best cap-
ture the imagination of travelers, the greed of treasure-seekers,
and the battle-fury of paladins. It is a plane of evil organized to
further its own malefic ends. It is dominated by the wretched
baatezu set into a rigid caste system, and is home to a large num-
ber of other evil creatures, as well. Each of the nine layers of the
hells are infinite, extending forever in all directions. The barriers
between layers are always found at the lowest point of the upper
level and at a very high point above the surface of the next layer
down. The Nine Hells are the most typically infernal of the lower
planes. The nine layers of the Hells are Avernus, Dis, Minauros,
Phlegethos, Stygia, Malbolge, Maladomini, Caina, and Nessus.

Acheron: Acheron, with its iron-shod battle plains, is the most
lawful of the evil planes, bridging the gap between the highly or-
ganized and evil Nine Hells and the ultimate organization of the
clockwork disks of Nirvana. Acheron is divided into four layers,
each layer stressing order over evil, the group over the individ-
ual. Each layer consists of huge blocks that drift together, join for
a time, then part again. These blocks are the size of nations, yet
when they collide there are no tremors. The layers of Acheron are
Avalas, Thuldanin, Tintibulus, and Ocanthus.

Fiends

The lower planes are home to a foul and wholly evil race of
creatures called fiends. They are manifestations of evil and mal-
ice, as angry and hateful as they are loathsome and unsightly.
They are an ancient race, whose long, violent history of wars
makes the existence of mankind seem but a brief flash of light in a
great darkness.

Scholars and sages have discovered that there are at least four
varieties of fiends, though there may, in fact, be more. Those
known to mortal sages are the baatezu, tanar'ri, yugoloth, and
gehreleth; each type is different, yet they share in their unholy
pursuit of evil and hatred unbridled.

The Baatezu

The layers of the Nine Hells are gruesome places, smears of
darkness into which shines no light; home to disgust and malice
made animate and given breath. Housed within these nine infinite
layers is a race of creatures so profane and loathsome as to be per-
fectly matched to their wicked environment. They are living cor-
ruption. They are hatred with great power. They are the baatezu.

The baatezu are an extremely lawful, hierarchial order of crea-
tures native to the Nine Hells. As such, the baatezu are lawful evil
to the extreme. Their own form of order and regularity is as im-
portant to them as the evil that they spread. They are very milita-
ristic and have a rigid form of progression through the ranks. If a
baatezu spends enough time in its current form and performs its
tasks well, it will eventually be “promoted” to the next higher
form of baatezu. Although this promotion usually means days of
agonizing pain as the creature transforms into the next highest
baatezu, the increase in status and power justifies the brutal
means.

The baatezu have recently—in their immortal viewpoint—
taken on a new task: that of ‘welcoming’ the lawful evil dead from
the Prime Material plane to the Nine Hells. The essences of those
dead take the form of either nupperibos (q.v.) or lemures (q.v.)
and are considered to be the lowest form of existence in the Nine
Hells.

Many of the lesser baatezu are often organized into vast arm-
ies, sometimes exceeding 100,000 baatezu in size. These armies
are used to defend the Nine Hells and to wage war against the
tanar'ri. Vast legions of baatezu will commonly assemble on one
of the other lower planes and march forward into battle. Whether

 

 
The Outer Planes

these raids are to gain new territory or are waged just for the plea-
sure of the killing is unknown.

Baatezu also constantly plot against the Prime Material plane.
The Dark Eight, a ruling group of pit fiends (q.v.), keeps close
tabs on the Prime Material plane through the eyes of evil beings
who come to them to gain power. If the baatezu can gain a foot-
hold on the Prime Material plane they will hold a tremendous
power advantage over the tanar'ri in their ancient Blood War
(q.v.).

One of the great weaknesses of the baatezu is that they may
never enter the Prime Material plane unless summoned there by a
mortal. The baatezu, therefore, scheme against men in order to
trick them into casting summoning magic.

The Tanar’ri

The tanar’ri are a race of creatures altogether different from the
baatezu. They dwell upon the many layers of the Abyss. These
creatures are an unholy combination of chaos and evil, though
they share some common qualities with the baatezu: hatefulness
and corruption.

The tanar’ri do not share the regimentation of the baatezu.
They are disorganized and tend to fight amongst themselves as
much as with others. Although their lack of discipline is a great li-
ability in the Blood War, the tanar’ri have an advantage: sheer
numbers. There are an uncountable, inestimable number of infi-
nitely large layers to the Abyss—the numbers upon which the
tanar’ri can draw are overwhelming. Impossible as it is to deter-
mine how many inhabitants dwell upon a planar layer that is infi-
nite in size, there are easily 100 or more times as many tanar’ri as
there are baatezu.

Like the baatezu, tanar’ri have come to ‘welcome’ the newest
inhabitants of their plane; dead, evil mortals from the Prime Ma-
terial plane. The newly dead that take the form of manes (q.v.)
are lowly and tormented. Unfortunately for the tanar'ri, they de-
stroy these enormous numbers of manes, through torment and
bullying, almost as fast as they arrive in the Abyss, further ham-
pering their war effort.

Codex of Mordenkainen Mordenkainen is a powerful mage from
Oerth. He suggests that a day will come when the plotting of the
baatezu will come to fruition and a gate will be opened into the
Prime Material plane. The following writing is excerpted from the
Codex of Mordenkainen:

Perhaps it was madness that compelled me to scry into the
Abyss, or perhaps it was my ever growing hunger for knowl-
edge. Both, I think, are equal curses.

When I caused my mighty crystal of scrying to open into the
great Abyss, I saw a sight quite simply unfit for mortal eyes to
view. The great writhing mass of torment and hatred that ex-
tended infinitely in all directions tore my soul asunder and
caused me to weep.

And as I scryed | became aware of an ancient war, a war of
death, a war of blood! And soon I looked upon a place where
darkness coalesced into substance, where hatred was given life
and breath. I saw a pillar of flame that extended up into the sky
and it rose from a base of torment. And the dead of the Abyss
lined the base and their wails brought horror to my heart. The
pillar took on images of torture and corruption so vile that |
could scarcely look upon it.

The Yugoloths

Because the baatezu and the tanar’ri cannot travel directly to
each others’ home planes, they clash in their mighty war in the
planes of Tarterus, Hades, Gehenna, and Acheron. It is on these

MC8

planes that the yugoloths practice their ancient trade, for they oc-
cupy the middle ground between the tanar’ri and the baatezu.

Yugoloths, being neutral evil in alignment, are perhaps the pur-
est of evil in the lower planes. They inhabit all four of the central-
ized planes of Tarterus, Hades, Gehenna, and Acheron. They act
as mercenaries for the tanar'ri and the baatezu, fighting for
whichever side can offer them the most power. They will also
gleefully betray either side if the price is right.

The yugoloths have been hiring themselves out to each side in
the Blood War for as long as the conflict has been waged. Like the
battle for the Prime Material plane, the tanar’ri and the baatezu
each try to offer more and more power to the yugoloths to entice
them to sway to their cause. To gain the cooperation of the entire
yugoloth race would give either side an overwhelming advantage
in the outer planes. But the wholly evil yugoloths will never be
permanently loyal to either side. As is said on the world of
Krynn, evil turns in upon itself.

The evil dead from the Prime Material plane that are not suffi-
ciently chaotic or lawful to pass into the Abyss or the Nine Hells end
up in the various other planes in the form of larva (q.v.). The yugo-
loths also gain pleasure by tormenting those pathetic creatures.

The Gehreleths

Gehreleths are foul and hateful of all things. They are com-
pletely uncooperative with anything that lives. They will attack
any nongehreleth that they encounter without reservation.

Among themselves, however, the gehreleths have a form of
honor. They never attack their own. Gehreleth never fights
gehreleth, with no exceptions. What spurs this loyalty is un-
known, for certainly the vile nature of the creatures suggests that
they are incapable of loyalty of any form.

If these horrid natives of the plane of Tarterus have any place in
the scheme of lower planar matters or the Blood War, it is not
readily apparent. They are, however, easiest to summon for the
spell casters of the Prime Material plane. Perhaps some greater
power created the gehreleths so that foolish mortal conjurers
would be less likely to summon a baatezu or tanar’ri when they
delved into such things.

Whatever their purpose, the gehreleths seem extremely cruel
and violent even when compared to the likes of the baatezu and
tanar'ri.

The Blood War

The entire span of the history of mankind is but a heartbeat
when compared to eternity. It is smaller still when compared to
the mighty Blood War that is fought between the baatezu and
tanar'ri. For as long as there has been time, these mighty races
have clashed with each other in a war of ultimate genocide and
wholesale destruction. There can be no compromise in this war.
Only total destruction of the enemy will end the Blood War. Such
has it been since the creation of time.

Necromancers and sages have diligently studied the Blood War
as a favored topic among such circles. Despite their efforts, it is
difficult to learn of something that began so long ago—the origins
of the Blood War are so remote as to be incomprehensible to even
the most wise sages of the Prime Material plane.

The sages of Toril perhaps sum up the Blood War best. They tell
of The One Who Remains Hidden who created the universe. De-
siring perfect balance, he created three races of beings: those of
good, those of neutrality, and those of evil. Of course, these origi-
nal races subdivided still further into lesser races—splinters of
evil were spread thinly among lesser evil races, but the greatest
block of evil was split evenly between the tanar’ri and baatezu.
Each possessed but half of a perfect sphere of evil, and each cov-
The Outer Planes

eted the other's half above all things. The Blood War rages over
the sphere of evil that both sides desire but neither side can com-
pletely capture.

Actually, the Blood War may be regarded as the salvation of
goodness. Were the two greatest teams of evil to quit their eternal
struggle, joining forces in a wanton spread of their corruption,
the champions of goodness would be hard pressed to stop them.

Whatever its origins, mankind plays but a small role in the
great war. As far as either the baatezu or the tanar'ri are con-
cerned, mankind merely exists to be dominated in order to pro-
vide a foothold in the endless war. It is possible that the Prime
Material plane itself holds some sort of energy that would be
valuable in the waging of the Blood War—mankind may be
merely the innocent bystander in the efforts of the fiends.

Concerning the Blood War, Mordenkainen writes:

I prepared all as had been described in the ancient tomes.
Every detail was checked a dozen times to insure it was correct,
and then it was checked a dozen more times. When all was
complete, I performed the act that caused me to pass into

MC8

a deep sleep in which I dreamed dreams of both history and
prophesy. I learned of many things during that ritual, but of
one thing did I learn much: the Blood War.

It was shown to me that the great evil of the two pits of dark-
ness were engaged in a battle of infinity. They clashed together
in endless energy and struggle and would likely continue to
clash for ever and ever.

When I had seen this battle I shuddered and a great fear came
over me. | was inclined to break the trance and leave my dream
state. But then I viewed a frightening sight. A thousand times a
thousand strands of unknown substance extended from infin-
ity to infinity. They were coils of time and written upon them
were the histories of all deeds and places. They passed through
all things in their way and tied all things together. And when I
saw that the strand that spoke of the Blood War passed through
the lower planes and then directly through the heart of man-
kind, I truly knew fear.

 

 

 
Aasimon

MC8

 

 

Dvircreas Gehenna, Hades, and the Nine Hells are populated by

fell beasts as terrible and evil as their planes, the upper planes are
home to powerful beings of goodness and light. The stewards that
attend the needs of these good entities are called the aasimon.
They are powerful and dangerous creatures, but are tempered by
kindness and compassion. Though they dwell primarily in the
outer planes, very far removed from the affairs of mankind, aasi-
mon are often called upon by those they serve to intervene in
mortal causes to support the causes of goodness there.

Combat: Aasimon do not take full damage from all attack forms.
They take the listed damage from the following attack forms:

 

Attack Form Damage
acid half
cold half
electricity (lightning) half

fire (dragon, magical) full

gas (poisonous, etc.) none
iron weapon full*
magic missile full
poison none
silver weapon full*

* unless unaffected by nonmagical weapons, in which case dam-
age is none.

All aasimon have the following spell-like powers that they can
use one per round at will:
aid
augury
change self
comprehend languages
cure serious wounds, 3 times per day
detect evil
detect magic
know alignment
read magic
teleport without error

ee @ @# #8 @eeees

All aasimon are able to travel freely throughout the upper
planes, going from one to the other at will. They may enter the
Astral and onto the Prime Material plane at the request of a
greater power. If specifically sent on a mission from a power they
serve, aasimon may enter the lower planes, but rarely will for the
servants of goodness and light have no place in the dark empti-
ness of those pits of evil.

When dwelling in the Prime Material plane, aasimon have a
special power specifically for dealing with mortals called celestial
reverence, This power may only be used if the aasimon is in his
normal, unaltered form. Whenever entering the presence of one
or more mortals on the Prime Material plane, the aasimon may
invoke celestial reverence in which case there is a momentary,
blinding flash of light that catches the attention of all mortals in
sight of it. Anyone viewing this spectacle must immediately make
a saving throw vs. paralyzation. Any person of good alignment
who fails his saving throw will be struck by a strong love for the
aasimon and a need to protect it. Anyone of evil or neutral align-
ment that fails his saving throw will suddenly fear the great
power of the aasimon and will not attack. If the evil creature is
less than 8 hit dice and they fail their save, they will flee the area
immediately. This ability is always available to any aasimon, but
they will rarely use it. Goodness dictates that the aasimon not use
their powers to manipulate others if it can at all help it.

The aasimon’s detect evil ability goes beyond the spell of the
same name. If within 100 feet of a source of evil (strongly aligned

individual, powerful evil magical item, etc.) the aasimon will au-
tomatically detect it. The direction, strength, and general nature
of the source will be instantly known. If an aasimon gazes directly
into eyes of an evil being, it will know the name, nature, and
background of that being. This power always functions and does
not require the aasimon to concentrate in order to use it.

Although the aasimon do not share the power that many other
outer planar creatures have to gate in others of their kind, they
can send out a form of distress call that other good powers can
sense. If an aasimon does this, the closest enchanted good beings
will immediately come to the rescue. Ki-rin, unicorns, and metal-
lic dragons are examples of some of the beings that might answer
this distress call and come to an aasimon’s aid. Obviously, this
ability does not create good beings, so if there are no good crea-
tures in the area or none that can get to the right plane, none will
arrive to assist.

Worshippers of a good power from the upper planes that is of
the utmost faith and of great power are 20% likely to attract the
attention of one of these servants if they are in dire need. This
chance should be modified if the worshipper is performing a mis-
sion for his or her church.

Habitat/Society: There are six varieties of aasimon, divided into
two groups: warriors and celestial stewards. They are divided as
follows:

Warrior
agathinon

Celestial Steward

astral deva
monadic deva
movanic deva
planetar
solar

Warriors: The warrior aasimon are the fighting force of upper
planes. They are often called upon to defend the borders of their
respective planes against intruders. It is worth noting that the evil
inhabitants of the lower planes are not the primary enemies of the
warrior aasimon. The fiends of the lowest planes are unable to
travel to the upper planes except by powerful magical means, so
such forays are rare. Interestingly, it is more often the beasts
found in the middle planes who invade the realms of the aasimon.
Seeking easy prey among the good creatures of the upper planes,
these raiders very often feel the wrath of the mighty aasimon war-
riors.,

As often as not, however, aasimon warriors are pitted against
each other in seemingly endless cycles of “holy” wars. Gathering a
vast host of agathinon warriors and whipping them into funda-
mentalist fervor, one pantheon will wage devastating campaigns
against another, slaughtering thousands, even millions in the
name of its particular brand of goodness. In these lamentable cir-
cumstances, agathinon can be found fighting agathinon. It is in-
teresting to note that, despite their goodness, aasimon can hold a
grudge for a very long time—bad feelings still exist between pan-
theons over holy wars thousands of years in the past.

Celestial Stewards: The mightiest and most just of the aasimon
are the celestial stewards. They are the direct servants of the
powers found in the upper planes. Although similar to each other,
each steward has a particular role to play in the affairs of the up-
per planes. Some are messengers, some render aid to mortal fol-
lowers, while still others act as scouts.

All aasimon, whatever their primary duties, are of good align-
ment. This, perhaps, is their most character building quality.
They will neither lie, cheat, attack needlessly, nor steal. They are
impeccably honorable in all their dealings. In this, unfortunately,
they can sometimes be predictable or even manipulated.
Aasimon, Agathinon

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Upper planes or prime

FREQUENCY: Uncommon (upper) or very rare
(prime)

ORGANIZATION: Army (upper) or solitary (prime)

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (15-16)

TREASURE: Incidental

ALIGNMENT: Neutral good

NO. APPEARING: 50-100 (upper) or 1 (prime)

ARMOR CLASS: 0

MOVEMENT: 15

HIT DICE: 8

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 (weapon) or special

DAMAGE/ATTACK: weapon or special

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 20%

SIZE: See below

MORALE: Elite (13-14)

XP VALUE: 30,500

Agathinon are the only aasimon warriors of the upper planes.
They will only appear in their natural form when on one of the
upper planes. There they will look much like an elf with opales-
cent, luminous skin and eyes that actually shine. When not on the
upper planes, an agathinon will assume the form of some other
creature or object at will. Male and female agathinon are of equal
size and power.

Combat: When in human form, an agathinon is likely to use non-
edged weapons (sling, mace, etc.) and will have the spell ability of
a 7th-level cleric with an 18 wisdom,

Agathinon will never attack in their natural form. At the slight-
est sign of danger, they will assume another form. They gain great
benefit from this because they will possess all attack forms and
spell-like powers of the form they assume, though they retain
their original hit points, THACO, intelligence, etc. For example, if
an agathinon assumes the form of an old bronze dragon, he will
have two claw attacks (for 1-8 each), a bite (for 4-14), snatch,
kick, wing buffet, and tail slap. It will also have the powerful
breath weapon and spell-like powers of the dragon. It will not,
however have 18 hit dice, but rather its own 8 hit dice.

On rare occasions, an agthion will assume the form of an inani-
mate object of magical nature, usually to be carried by some
other being. This might be a magical lamp, a magical sword,
necklace, or even something as unpretentious as a vase or glass
vial, as the agathinon chooses. When in this form, the agathinon
confers all powers of the object to its possessor plus several other
benefits: the ability to cast 1st level priest spells from any sphere
at will, and the ability for the individual to turn undead as if he or
she were a 7th-level priest. Agathinon will never confer abilities
to evil individuals. In fact, any evil person touching the item will
receive 1-12 hit points of damage with no save allowed. Neutrals
may receive benefits from the item only if their current mission or
actions serve the needs of the agathinon.

All agathinon have the ability to become ethereal at will, and
speak any language using their powerful telepathic ability. They
are struck only by +1 or better magical weapons, and save as
14th-level priests regardless of the form they assume. All
agathinons are immune to the following: life-level draining spells
and powers, death spells, disintegration, and energy from the
positive material plane.

 

 

 

 

In addition to the spell-like abilities available to all aasimon,
agathinon may use the following spell-like abilities, at will, once
per round:

® clairaudience

* clairvoyance

© ESP

* hold person

The level of magic for these powers is equal to the agathinon’s
hit dice.

Habitat/Society: Agathinon have a special place in the upper
planes. First and foremost they are warriors. They form the elite
troops of the celestial armies (see einheriar) and are often found in
its vanguard. When in groups that can be as much as 100 strong,
agathinon will most often fight in human form. But sometimes, in
special circumstances, they will assume the form of some power-
ful creatures such as pegasi or dragons to do battle. Regardless of
the form they assume, the agathinon are fearless warriors that
will often defend their cause to the death,

Beyond combat, agathinon serve another important function.
They are sent to the Prime Material plane in order to aid mortals
in their confrontations with evil. These instructions will likely
come down from one of the celestial stewards or, in the case of
mortals of extreme courage and importance, from one of the
powers of the upper planes themselves.

When agathinon go to the Prime Material plane to aid mortals,
they always go alone. They are 60% likely to assume human
form, 30% likely to assume the form of some other creature, and
only 10% of the time, agathinon take the form of an inanimate
object (magical sword, amulet, etc.).

Ecology: Agathinon are very unusual in their true form. They ap-
pear much like elves and tend to be very serious about their
causes and very serious about combat. Their personalities tend to
be somewhat stern and unyielding. In any event, agathinon are
very devoted beings, and are unswerving in their constant pursuit
of what is right.

 

 

 

 
Aasimon, Deva

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

Astral Monadic Movanic
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Upper planes Upper planes Upper planes
FREQUENCY: Very rare Very rare Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary Solitary Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any Any
DIET: Omnivore Omnivore Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Genius (17-18) Genius (17-18) Genius (17-18)
TREASURE: Nil Nil Nil
ALIGNMENT: Any good Any good Any good
NO. APPEARING: lor 1-3 1 or 1-3 lor 1-3
ARMOR CLASS: =“§ =5 a
MOVEMENT: 24, Fl 48 (B) 15, Fl 36 (B) 12, FI 30 (B)
HIT DICE: 12 10 8
THACO: 9 11 13
NO. OF ATTACKS: 2 2 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 3-18/3-18 3-12/3-12 +8 (strength bonus) By weapon type
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Disruption Smiting See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Spell immunity, protection, never Spell immunity, protection, +1 Parry, protection, never surprised,

surprised, +2 or better weapons

or better weapons to hit

regeneration, +1 or better

 

 

to hit weapons to hit
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 70% 60% 40%
SIZE: M (7' tall) M (6’ tall) M (6' tall)
MORALE: Fearless (19-20) Fearless (19-20) Fearless (19-20)
XP VALUE: 60,000 52,500 78,500

 

 

 

 

The race of devas inhabit the upper outer planes, those support-
ing good alignment: the Seven Heavens, Arcadia, Twin Para-
dises, Elysium, Beastlands, Olympus, and Gladsheim. They are
servants and messengers of the deities and powers of those
planes. All devas appear as extremely beautiful male humans
with large, feathery wings fanning gracefully from their backs.
Regardless of the variety, they are stunningly handsome to be-
hold, seemingly flawless in their appearance.

Combat: Although they are servants of goodness, devas often
find themselves in positions where they must deliver their mes-
sages of good by the points of their swords, figuratively speaking.
They are, therefore, devastatingly powerful warriors able to take
the battle to the very doorstep of the evil that they oppose.

In addition to those available to all aasimon, all devas can per-
form the following spell-like powers, one at a time:

cure disease, 3 times per day

cure light wounds, 7 times per day
detect lie

detect snares & pits, 7 times per day
dispel magic, 7 times per day

heal, 1 time per day

infravision

invisibility, 10’ radius

light

polymorph self

protection from evil

remove curse

remove fear

tongues

®*seeseoeseesesese#brneresee#estseses«

Devas are not affected by cold, electrical, magic missile, petrifi-
cation, poison, normal fire-based, or any gas attack spells. Except
for monadic devas, who are not affected by fire of any type,
devas take half damage from dragon and magical fire attacks.
They take full damage from acid attacks. All devas are immune to
attacks from nonmagical weapons.

Habitat/Society: Devas are the cornerstone of the forces of good-
ness. They are the powerful and trusted vanguard of the upper
planes. Each of the three varieties of devas has a different task to
perform in the scheme of the upper planes.

Devas are employed differently by the powers of the upper
planes according to their type. The most common missions for
each type are listed below. Although each variety of deva is em-
ployed differently, they are all equal in status with no rivalry be-
tween types.
Aasimon, Deva

MC8

 

Ecology: Little is known about deva ecology. They exist naturally
in just about all of the upper planes where they live in perfect har-
mony with other beings around them.

Because the remnants of their material form disappears imme-
diately upon their deaths, none has ever been examined.

Devas are known to have a close relationship with the other
aasimon, particularly the planetars with which they often inter-
act. In times of great need, a planetar will lead a group of devas to
perform some mission for a good power.

Astral Deva

Astral devas have golden tan skin, amber eyes, and fair hair.

Combat: Astral devas are extremely agile and supple, seeming to
move with inhuman quickness. They carry a mace-like weapon
that has a +3 magical bonus on all attack rolls. It does a devastat-
ing 3-18 points of damage per successful attack. Any creature
struck twice in the same round by the weapon must make a saving
throw vs. spells or be knocked senseless for 1-12 melee rounds.
The weapon has all the special abilities of a mace of disruption.

In addition to those already available to all aasimon and devas,
astral devas have the following spell-like powers that they can use
one at a time, once per turn or melee round, as applicable:

© blade barrier, 1 time per day
© detect invisibility

Astral devas are never surprised. They are not harmed by a to-
tal vacuum. They are immune to level loss, whether undead or
magical. Their souls cannot be entrapped or imprisoned. They
are immune to death spells. Astral devas have a charisma of 20.

Habitat/Society: Whenever matters in the lower planes require
the attention of the powers of good, astral devas are employed.
These powerful warriors have both the strength and purity for
just such missions. They can pass into any of the lower planes at
will bringing the force of their justice to the heart of evil.

Astral devas possess another ability that will allow them to
perform their missions. If directly commanded by the power that
they serve, an astral deva can pass into any layer of any of the
lower planes without passing through the higher layers.

Astral devas also commonly travel through the Astral plane,
performing any needed tasks there. They are commonly sent to
rescue good aligned mortals that have become lost or stranded in
the Astral plane.

Monadic Deva

Monadic devas have dark brown skin, jet black hair, and piercing
green eyes.

Combat: Unlike the astral deva, monadics are of strong, bulky
build and rely more upon their great strength than on speed and
agility. For all attacks, a monadic deva should be considered to
have a strength of 20 (+8 damage adjustment). These strong
stewards of the gods carry a great metal rod that is enchanted to
give an additional +3 on all attack and damage rolls. This
weapon has all properties of a rod of smiting. These powers can
never be employed by anyone save the monadic deva that owns
the weapon and it will never run out of charges. If a solid creature
(for example, one made of stone) or a metal-armored opponent is
struck, the target will suffer an additional 1-8 points of damage
per hit.

Monadic devas can use all common powers shared by devas.
The light they shed can extend from 3-30 feet as desired. The pro-
tection from evil sphere is half power (+1) but of a 15-foot ra-
dius. Monadic devas have the following additional abilities:

* hold monster
® mirror image

Monadic devas are immune to life level loss from magic or un-
dead. They are not affected by death magic of any type. Their
charisma is 19.

Habitat/Society: On rare occasions, a power from the upper
planes will have need of a servant to go to one of the elemental or
para-elemental planes. When this need arises, monadic devas are
used. Monadics are able to pass into any of the elemental planes
at will. They can survive in any of the elemental planes without ill
effect.

Monadic devas also have the power similar to charm person
that can be used on elementals. The spell-like power has all the
functions and qualities of the wizard spell charm person but will
work only on elementals. The power can be used one time per
round with no limit to the number of times per day it can be em-
ployed.

Movanic Deva

Movanic devas are milky white with silvery hair and eyes.

Combat: Much like their Astral counterparts, the movanic deva
is slender in appearance and exceedingly agile in movement.
These powerful warriors of good can never be surprised. Al-
though they are often seen carrying a variety of weapons, the
most often employ a great two-handed sword with which they
can attack twice per melee round. The great enchanted blade is, in
all respects, equal to a sword, +1 flame tongue. It does damage
equal to a two-handed sword (1d10 to S or M, 3d6 to L) with each
hit. If a movanic deva forfeits one or both of its attacks, it can
parry one strike per attack forfeited. The parry is automatically
successful and requires no die roll. The parry can be used against
magical attacks, even spells that would normally always hit (e.g.
magic missile).

Movanics, in addition to the powers and abilities common to
all aasimon and devas, may use any wizard spell of the
invocation/evocation school, at will, once per day. They may
also use the following spell-like powers, once per round, at will:

® anti-magic shell
® protection from normal missiles
® spell turning

When on a mission of great importance for a power of good
and when all other options for survival are spent, these dedicated
servants may call upon the aid of a mighty planetar (q.v.). There
is a 30% chance that a planetar will come to the deva’s rescue.

The movanic deva is surrounded by a powerful protection that
acts as a double strength protection from evil and causes the deva
to be immune to attacks from all but +2 or better magical weap-
ons. They regenerate 2 hit points per melee round.

Habitat/Society: Movanic devas are perhaps the most privileged
of all the devas, for they are sent to the Prime Material plane
where they often directly aid the mortal followers of the good dei-
ties. They will normally only do this in moments of dire need and
usually only for the more prominent or powerful mortals.

Of course, movanic devas are able to pass directly into the
Prime Material plane at will. They will rarely appear in their nat-
ural form, but will most likely polymorph themselves into a per-
son or animal. Sometimes, however, the shock value of their
natural form will serve their needs better.

 

 

 
Aasimon, Light

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Upper planes or prime
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: None
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Any good
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: -10
MOVEMENT: Fl 48 (A)
HIT DICE: 10
THACO: 11

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-12

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Spell immunity, never surprised, +2
or better weapons to hit

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 50%

 

SIZE: S (variable composition)
MORALE: Fearless (19-20)
XP VALUE: 35,000

Lights are beings of energy that inhabit the upper planes. They
appear to be swirling mists of light that seem to shift their shapes
constantly. By looking deep into a light one can observe its inte-
rior, a chaotic rainbow of colors that changes as rapidly and ran-
domly as the shape of the being.

Combat: Lights are champions of good and will readily engage in
combat with evil creatures. By coming into contact with an evil
creature, a light can make an energy attack that will inflict 1-12
points of damage per hit. This attack will not affect beings of
good alignment. Because the attack is a form of energy, non-
magical protection is not considered when determining the armor
class of a light’s opponent. Any magical protection, including
magical armor, is considered, but only the “pluses” of the armor
offer protection. For example, if a light is attacking a man in plate
mail, +3, his effective armor class would be 7 (for the +3) rather
than the standard 10. Bracers of defense, AC 4 would remain
AC 4.

Lights also possess the following spell-like abilities that they
can use once per round, on at a time, at will:

protection from evil, always active
dispel evil, 3 times per day
continual light, 7 times per day
light

bless

hold person, 7 times per day

These are, of course, in addition to the spell-like abilities com-
mon to all aasimon.

Lights are immune to all charm, beguiling, geas, quest, sleep,
and other mind-affecting spells, trapping spells, and death magic.
They are never surprised in combat and are damaged only by +2
or better magical weapons. No good creature can ever attack a
light (they are simply unable to do so without a radical and imme-
diate change of alignment) and neutrals must make a saving
throw vs. paralyzation every round they wish to attack or miss.

 

If sorely pressed, a light can attempt to gate in an agathinon.
This may only be attempted one time per day and there is a 50%
chance of success.

Lights may only be destroyed on their home plane. If they are
reduced to zero or lower hit points elsewhere, they will dissipate
and reform in one month.

Habitat/Society: Lights are created by the powers and deities of
the upper planes in order to serve as familiars for good-aligned,
high-level worshippers. They can, on extremely rare occasions,
be granted as companions on quests for a very limited duration.

The process of requesting a light is simple. First, the worship-
per must fast for three days and nights, meditating in total soli-
tude. When the fasting is over, the worshipper than bathes
himself in a tub of holy water. The bath complete, the worshipper
then casts the spell find familiar (or has someone else cast it in the
case of nonwizards). If everything is done properly and the sub-
ject is worthy, there is a 10% chance (+1% per level above 12th)
of the light being granted. Paladins about to place themselves at
peril in the name of goodness often call for the assistance of a light
and, if successful, becomes a tremendous force against evil.

There are less than 1,000 lights in existence, and therefore one
will never stay with a single master for life. Rather, the light will
accompany a master on a single mission and then leave when the
mission is over. If the subject already has a familiar, the light will
not interfere with that relationship whatsoever.

Ecology: Lights are pure energy and feed from energy supplied
from their plane of origin. They are even believed, by some, to be
the substance of good fashioned into a physical form.

 
Aasimon, Planetar

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Upper planes

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Genius (17-18)

TREASURE: None

ALIGNMENT: Any good

NO. APPEARING: i

ARMOR CLASS: ~7

MOVEMENT: 15, Fl 48 (B)

HIT DICE: 14

THACO: 7 (+6 strength and weapon bonus)

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-10 +10 (strength and magical
bonus)

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Vorpal weapon, plus special

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Never surprised, regeneration

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 75%

SIZE: L (8' tall)

MORALE: Fearless (19-20)

XP VALUE: 143,500

Planetars are powerful spirits that directly serve the deities and
powers of the upper planes. They appear as tall, powerful hu-
manoids with smooth, emerald skin. Their heads are hairless and
their eyes are a penetrating bright blue. Planetars have great
white feathered wings that protrude from their backs. Their over-
all appearance is one of strength and confidence.

Combat: Planetars carry great two-handed swords that only their
kind can wield. These huge weapons have all the power and sev-
ering abilities of a vorpal sword. Planetars most often use this
weapon, attacking three times per melee round with it. In addi-
tion to his sword’s magical attack adjustment of +3, a planetar
has a damage bonus of +7 due to his great strength (19), giving it
a total of +3 attack adjustment and +10 damage adjustment.

Planetars have the spell ability of a 7th-level priests (wisdom
equal to 21) with major access to all spheres. In addition to those
available to aasimon in general, planetars may also use the fol-
lowing spell-like abilities that can be used one at a time, once per
round, at will:

animate object

blade barrier, 3 times per day
commune

control weather, 1 time per day

cure blindness or deafness

cure disease

detect invisibility, lie, and snares & pits, always active
dispel magic

earthquake, 1 time per day
feeblemind, 1 time per day

fire storm, 1 time per day

flame strike, 3 times per day

heal

holy word, 1 time per day

improved invisibility up to 10’ radius
insect plague, 1 time per day

limited wish, 1 time per day
polymorph any object

protection from evil, up to 40’ radius, always active
raise dead, 3 times per day

remove curse and fear

s*e*#e @oseeekegesecseseeteesee#gc§eseses#eeete#es

 

 

 

 

 

 

resist cold

restoration, 1 time per day

shape change, 1 time per day

speak with dead

symbol, any, 1 time per day

true seeing, always active

weather summoning, 1 time per day
wind walk, 7 times per day

eeeege8s6s8s6

Planetars automatically detect illusions. Planetars can commu-
nicate with any creature with a powerful telepathy that functions
with a 100’ range.

Planetars take half damage from magical fire. They take full
damage from acid attacks. All planetars are immune to attacks
from nonmagical weapons and magical weapons of +3 or lesser
enchantment. Planetars are not affected by cold, electrical, magic
missile, petrification, poison, normal fire-based, or any gas at-
tack spells. They are immune to any life level loss. They are im-
mune to charm, confusion, domination, and feeblemind spells.
Their souls cannot be affected by imprisonment or trap the soul
spells. Planetars are immune to death spells.

Planetars are never surprised. They regenerate four hit points
per melee round. Unless encountered on the upper outer planes,
only the material form of a planetar can be harmed. The being’s
life force returns to its home plane to become corporeal again;
this process requires four decades.

Habitat/Society: Planetars will typically come to the aid of only
the most powerful mortal servants of good. As a general rule,
characters serving a good deity or power that are at least 12th
level and on a mission directly related to that deity or power will
have a chance of gaining the attention of a planetar. There is a
base 5% chance of this, plus 1% per level above 12th. This chance
should be modified by the DM for each circumstance.

Ecology: Like all other aasimon, planetars are corporeal life entit-
ies that exist outside of any ecosystem.

 

 

 
Aasimon, Solar

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Upper planes
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Supra-genius (19-20)
TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Any good

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 10

MOVEMENT: 18, Fl 48 (B)

HIT DICE: 177 hp

THACO: 5 (+5 weapon bonus)
NO. OF ATTACKS: 4
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-20 +16

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Vorpal severing, arrows of slaying
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 85%

SIZE: L (9’ tall)

MORALE: Fearless (19-20)

XP VALUE: 225,000

Solars are the most powerful of the aasimon and the greatest of
the celestial stewards. They appear to be very large humans with
beautiful and muscular bodies. Their skin and hair take on metal-
lic coloration. Their eyes are a brilliant topaz. A solar’s voice is
deep and commanding, impossible to ignore.

Combat: Each solar fights with a mighty sword that only it can
wield. The weapon acts as asword +5 and has all the properties
of a sword of dancing and a vorpal sword. A solar can attack
with his sword four times per melee round, and does a base of 2-
20 points of damage per hit.

Solars also use an enormous composite bow with a magical
quiver that produces any arrow of slaying that the solar desires.
Each bow attack has a +2 attack adjustment and will slay any
target it hits.

A solar has spells as if he were a 15th-level priest with major ac-
cess to all spheres. Also, in addition to the powers available to
aasimon in general, solars have the following spell-like powers
that can be used one at time, one per round, at will:

animate object, 3 times per day
antipathy-sympathy, 3 times per day
astral spell, 1 time per day
commune

confusion, 3 times per day

control weather

creeping doom, 1 time per day
dispel evil and magic

Drawmij's instant summons
earthquake, 3 times per day

finger of death, 1 time per day

fire storm, 1 time per day

heal

holy word, 3 times per day
imprisonment, 1 time per day
improved invisibility

infravision, 24', always active

mass charm, 3 times per day
permanency, 3 times per day
polymorph any object or self, 1 time per day
power word, any variety, 1 time per day
prismatic spray, 1 time per day

 

 

 

 

 

 

restoration, 1 time per day
resurrection, 3 times per day

shape change, 3 times per day
symbol, any variety, 3 times per day
vanish, 3 times per day

vision, 1 time per day

wind walk, 7 times per day

wish, 1 time per day

Each solar can cast a protection from evil of 70' radius. This
sphere can also serve as protection from normal missiles and a mi-
nor globe of invulnerability if the solar desires. Solars can use any
of the detect spells, at will. When laying hands upon a creature, a
solar can bestow the ability to survive in any environment for up
to 100 years. Their charisma is 24.

Lawful good solars can summon 1-2 ki-rin; neutral good solars
can summon 1-2 phoenix; and chaotic good solars can summon 1-
2 greater titans. Solars can perform the summons three times per
day with a 75% chance of success per summons. They may also
gate in 1 planetar or 1-4 devas, the option resting with the solar.

Solars are not affected by cold, electrical, magic missile, petrifi-
cation, poison, or any gas attack spells. They take no damage
from acid attacks. Solars are immune to attacks from nonmagical
weapons or magical weapons of +4 or lesser enchantment. They
are never surprised. They are immune to life level loss from un-
dead or magic. They are immune to charm, confusion, death
spell, domination, feeblemind, hold, imprisonment, and trap the
soul spells. They regenerate at a rate of 7 hit points per melee
round, Unless on their home plane, only the material form of a
solar can be destroyed. Their spirit requires seven decades to re-
form.

Habitat/Society: Solars are absolutely the most powerful servants
of the good deities and powers of the upper planes.

Ecology: Solars are powerful enough to be deities themselves, but
choose not to have worshippers.
Air Sentinel

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Twin Paradises (Shurrock)
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Family
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: None (see below)
INTELLIGENCE: High (13-14)
TREASURE: Z

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic good
NO. APPEARING: 2-8

ARMOR CLASS: 6

MOVEMENT: Fl 36 (A)

HIT DICE: 5+¥1

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6/1-6
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Shocking hug
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Missile deflection
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (6' tall)
MORALE; Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 975

Air sentinels are beneficial spirits that reside on the Twin Paradise
layer of Shurrock. They appear much like the djinn from the Ele-
mental Plane of Air. From the waist up they are strong, bald-
headed humans with distinct features. The dominant males
usually sport a moustache and goatee. They are quite fond of jew-
elry, often wearing necklaces, arm bracers, earrings, etc. From
the waist down, air sentinels look very much like a small tornado
or twisting cone of wind. They are jovial beings and will usually
project a friendly expression and demeanor.

Combat: By nature, air sentinels are nonviolent and loathe to en-
ter combat. Unless something important is at stake, they will usu-
ally escape from battle with their impressive flying speed.

If forced into combat, however, air sentinels will attack by
means of a small electrical charge that they release from their
hands. In appearance, these charges seem much like miniature
lightning bolts. An air sentinel can fire two charges per round at
one or two opponents. Each charge does 1-6 points of damage per
hit. Because the charge is primarily electricity, metal armor is ig-
nored when determining the target's armor class.

Air sentinels can also use a hug attack in combat if the need is
sufficiently pressing. The sentinel attacks by wrapping both of its
strong arms around an opponent (requiring only one attack roll)
and then releasing a strong electrical attack. If the hug hits, the
electricity will do 3-18 points of damage. Any being so damaged
must make a system shock roll. If the roll fails, the being will fall
unconscious for 1-8 melee rounds. Air sentinels will never kill
anyone (even an evil being) who is unconscious. They would con-
sider such an act barbaric.

Air sentinels also have a limited form of missile deflection. In
any round, a sentinel can forfeit its attack and instead create a
strong swirl of air around it. This air shield forces a —5 penalty
on all missile attacks made against them. The air shield can be
used three times per day and lasts for one round.

Habitat/Society: Air sentinels perform a vital duty on the layer of
Shurrock. They act as protectors for weaker beings that have

 

 

 

 

 

found their way to the more robust layer of the Twin Paradises.
Shurrock is rocked with booming thunder squalls and hard rains.
Its weather and terrain are both hardy and challenging to any
who go there. Many has been the time a mortal has traveled to
Shurrock only to find himself in grave danger from the unex-
pected weather. Air sentinels police the layer for beings in danger.
They will rescue the newcomers and carry them off to one of the
many large and sheltered caves that exist on Shurrock.

The true origin of air sentinels is knowledge lost to the ages.
They obviously bear an extremely close resemblance to djinn
from the Elemental Plane of Air. Sages speculate that some deity
or power from the Twin Paradises—having seen the need for
some powerful being to protect the many visitors to Shurrock
from its strong weather—made a pact with a group of djinn to
travel to Shurrock and live there as guardians. Whatever deal
was struck with those proud and noble air spirits is unknown, but
surely it must have been a beneficial pact since the air sentinels
have patrolled Shurrock for years uncounted.

Ecology: The air sentinels are constantly increasing their number
by breeding prodigiously. They have a fiercely strong sense of
family and honor, and in many ways resemble the djinn they
most likely evolved from.

Due to their strength and agility—and, of course, to the gener-
ally good alignment of Shurrock—air sentinels have no natural
enemies. They also appear to be, in a sense, immortal. Young sen-
tinels will grow to an adult age and appear to get no older. But af-
ter a certain time (usually no more than 200 years) air sentinels
will travel away, never to be seen or heard from again. Why this
occurs and what happens to the air sentinels is unknown. Perhaps
these proud, majestic beings simply pass into another state of be-
ing. Sages have no evidence one way or another.

 

 

 

 
Animal Lord

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Cat Lord Wolf Lord Hawk Lord
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Beastlands Beastlands Beastla nds
FREQUENCY: Very rare Very rare Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary Solitary Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any Any
DIET: Carnivore Carnivore Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (15-16) Exceptional (15-16) Exceptional (15-16)
TREASURE: Nil Nil Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral Neutral Neutral
NO. APPEARING: Unique Unique Unique
ARMOR CLASS: 3 5 4
MOVEMENT: 21 15 12, Fl 24 (C)
HIT DICE: 122 hit points 122 hit points 122 hit points
THACO: 5 5 5
NO. OF ATTACKS: See below See below See below
DAMAGE/ATTACK: See below See below See below
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Magical weapons, rake, darts Poison Dive
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Danger sense Danger sense, immune to Danger sense

nonmagical weapons

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 50% 50% 50%
SIZE: See below See below See below
MORALE: Champion (15-16) Champion (15-16) Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: 24,000 24,000 24,000

 

 

 

 

The three animal lords listed above are only examples of the
many lords who live in the Beastlands, the plane also known as
the Happy Hunting Grounds. For each variety of animal there is a
corresponding animal lord. There is a fox lord, a bass lord, a
mouse lord, a horse lord, and hundreds of other animal lords.
Animal lords can appear in two distinct forms: a human form
and an animal form. In either form, each animal lord looks quite
different. In humanoid form, they look much like a human man
or woman but with subtle features of the animal in question. In

 

this form, they are of standard size, about 6 feet tall. In animal
form, they look like the animal over which they exercise domin-
ion. The tiger lord will look like a sleek, beautiful tiger, the
badger lord will appear as a badger, etc.

Combat: Each of the animal lords has a unique style of combat
depending on the animal over which they have dominion. Their
propensity for combat differs with each lord, some being natu-
rally more aggressive than others. The wolf lord is likely more as-
sertive, if not more hostile, than the rabbit lord would be. As a
general rule, specific animal lords tend to approach combat situa-
tions much the way their animal counterparts do—predators tend
to attack whereas herbivores tend to flee, and so on. However,
this is not always the case, as some animal lords see themselves as
protectors of their subject creatures. The camel lord, for instance,
tends to run with a herd, fighting ferociously when necessary to
protect the flight of the camels. Attack forms vary as widely as at-
titude among the animal lords. Listed below are the combat abili-
ties of the three animal lords detailed here. They provide excellent
guidelines for the other lords.

All animal lords have a natural form of telepathy or ESP that
they are always employing. It is, therefore, impossible to surprise
or deceive one of these lords.

Animal lords also have a keen danger sense. Much like wild an-
imals, the animal lords have a danger sense that borders on pre-
cognition. When in mortal danger, the lord will be 90% likely to
have a “bad feeling” and 25% likely to know exactly what is
about to happen.

All animal lords possess the following spell-like abilities:

* anti-magic shell, 3 times per day
* charm person, on any one person affectionate to the lord's
animal,

* plane shift

* teleport

Animal lords have immunity to all charm related spells includ-
ing spells that compel the lord to do something (i.e. geas, etc.).
They can summon 2-12 animals of the lord's type (three times per
day, 100% success). They also have increased senses according to

 

 
Animal Lord

the lord's animal. (For example, the hawk lord will have excellent
eye-sight.)

Habitat/Society: While it would be incorrect to say that the ani-
mal lords are immoral, it would not be wrong to say they are
amoral, especially when dealing with outside affairs. The animal
lords care little for anything besides matters directly related to
their business. They will conduct their day to day affairs related
to the animal over which they hold dominion with little regard
for the world around them.

That is not to say that the existence of the animal lords does not
benefit other animals or people. If a person or other animal is in a
lord's territory, the lord will often aid the creature to get rid of it
rather than let it die. But in all other dealings, an animal lord can
be brutal and seemingly uncaring. There is, as they say, no such
thing as animal politics.

Cat Lord

The lord of cats, in his human form, looks like a dark haired,
dark eyed human with a muscular, compact form. The one trait
that separates him from other humans is his cat-like eyes with
vertical pupils. In his cat form, he looks like a great black panther
with fiery red eyes and a fiercely strong form.

Combat: When in human form, the cat lord wields a long sword
of wounding with which he can attack twice per round. He also
employs darts, +2 with which he gains an additional +3 to hit
because of dexterity. He automatically has ten such darts at the
beginning of any combat.

When in cat form, the cat lord attacks with two huge paws and
a vicious bite. The claws each do 1-4 points of damage per hit and
the bite does 1-10 points of damage per hit. If both front paws hit,
the cat has the option of raking with its two back claws for an ad-
ditional 1-4 points of damage per hit.

Habitat/Society: The cat lord tends to the affairs of felines both in
the inner and outer planes. He will often be found in areas on the
Prime Material plane where men are driving cats out of their nat-
ural habitat. He will also lead prides of cats out of danger by ap-
pearing and assuming leadership of the pride. While this often
means killing the current leader of the pride, the lord sees this as a
necessary evil for the good of the group.

Nonfelines will see the cat lord in different ways according to
their disposition towards cats in general. To cat lovers, the cat
lord will have a 22 charisma and seem very attractive. To those in-
different to the species, he will have an 18 charisma and seem like
an interesting human. To those who dislike or even hate cats, the
cat lord will have a 10 charisma and seem repulsive and intimidat-
ing.
The cat lord is viewed by some as being evil and by others as
having good alignment. But neither is the truth, for the cat lord is
not to be bothered by the affairs of men but rather is concerned
with feline matters alone.

Wolf Lord

The lord of wolves appears more human than most other animal
lords. His human form is that of a teenaged boy with sharp, lu-
pine features. His face is intelligent and his eyes shine bright with
life. In animal form, the wolf lord is great grey wolf that is often
seen leading huge packs of other wolves.

MC8

Combat: In human form, the wolf lord is rather a weak fighter.
He always prefers to transform into a wolf when entering com-
bat. In human form the lord will wield a dagger of venom filled
with poison (class E, injected, immediate, death/20). The dagger
is so enchanted that when the wolf lord is wielding it, it will never
run dry of poison.

In animal form, the wolf lord is a powerful foe. He attacks
twice per round with a powerful bite that will inflict 2-12 points of
damage per attack. The wolf lord is also immune to nonmagical
weapons when in animal form.

Habitat/Society: The wolf lord is perhaps one of the most alarm-
ing of the lords. Even in his human form, this strange lord will
maintain many of the characteristics of his animals. He is cunning
and wily, and at times even brutal. As with all animal lords, this is
not due to any evil inclination in him, but rather it is the character
of wolves.

Hawk Lord

In human form, the hawk lord is a beautiful, independent looking
woman with noble and charismatic features. She carries herself
with an air of confidence and a demeanor that gently demands re-
spect. In animal form, she is a large hawk with distinctive white
markings and a tremendous wing span.

Combat: Of the three animal lords detailed here, the hawk lord is
perhaps the weakest fighter while in human form. Her THACO is
increased to a 20 when human and she does not have proficiency
in any weapon. Her main form of attack is her ability to cast
charm person on anyone she meets, as per the wizard spell. She
can perform this ability seven times per day.

In animal form, however, she is more than an able combatant.
She can use her tremendous claws and brutal beak in tandem to
create an impressive attack. The claws will do 1-6 points of dam-
age per hit and the beak will do 1-4 points of damage per hit. Her
favored manner of attacking, however, is the plummeting dive
she is able to perform, often from heights in excess of 100 feet! She
may not attack with her beak when diving, but her claws will
each be +2 on attack rolls and double all damage rolls.

Habitat/Society: The hawk lord is a noble being who, unlike most
of the animal lords, finds pleasure in dealing with humans. She is
often found in human form walking the lands of man and inter-
facing with those people.

The hawk lord is found most often dealing with the affairs of
hawks everywhere. She is found frequently in the upper planes
and the Prime Material plane. She will often appear when hawks
are being driven out of their natural homeland and any other
times when hawks are endangered or threatened.

Ecology: The spirits of the animal lords are immortal. In a sense,
they are the gods to their respective animals. If an animal lord's
form is killed, its essence will reappear in another of its animals,
far away, perhaps even on another plane.

The primary driving force of the animal lords is nature. Their
own will and the will of the individual is deferred to nature. Al-
though the rabbit lord will seek vengeance upon man for destroy-
ing the homeland of rabbits, he will not shed a tear for a rabbit
killed by natural predators. It is the way of nature and the will of
the gods.

 

 

 
Archon

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Lantern Hound Warden Sword Tome
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Seven Heavens Seven Heavens Seven Heavens Seven Heavens Seven Heavens
FREQUENCY: Common Common Uncommon Rare Very Rare
ORGANIZATION: Group Group Group Group Group
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any Any Any Any
DIET: None Carnivore Carnivore Carnivore Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7) Average (8-10) High (13-14) Exceptional (15-16) Genius (17-18)
TREASURE: Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil
ALIGNMENT: Lawful good Lawful good Lawful good Lawful good Lawful good
NO. APPEARING: 3-18 1-6 1-6 1-6 1-3
ARMOR CLASS: 5 1 =] = =s
MOVEMENT: F] 24 (A) 12 12 12,Fl 18 (C) 12, Fl 18 (C)
HIT DICE: 1/2 6 8 10 12
THACO: 20 15 13 11 9
NO. OF ATTACKS: 2 3orl 3 4 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6/1-6 1-4/1-4/1-8 or by _—_—1-8/1-8/2-12 2-8/2-8/2-8/2-8 1-10/1-10
weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below See below Bear hug, spell'use Dive, spell use Spell use
SPECIAL DEFENSES: +1 or better +1 or better +2 or better +2 or better +3 or better
weapons to hit, weapons to hit, weapons to hit, weapons to hit, weapons to hit,
never surprised never surprised never surprised never surprised never surprised
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil 10% 20% 30% 40%
SIZE: S (3' diameter) M (6’ tall) L (8’ tall) L (8' tall) L (8' tall)
MORALE: Fanatic (17-18) Fanatic (17-18) Fanatic (17-18) Fanatic (17-18) Fanatic (17-18)
XP VALUE: 5,000 15,000 24,500 48,500 53,500

 

 

 

 

Archons are the primary inhabitants of the Seven Heavens. The
five varieties of archon have wholly different appearances.

However strange and frightening their appearance, archons
never seem evil. Rather, they appear as beings at peace with
themselves and their environment.

 

Combat: As the most numerous inhabitants of the Seven Heav-
ens, archons are often responsible for defending the plane against
intruders. Archons, as peace loving beings, loathe to fight but
will do so in defense of their home or other nonevil beings.
Though not of a warlike nature, archons can appear quite fear-
some and menacing when pressed.

All archons share the following spell-like abilities, useable once
per round, at will:

continual light

infravision

protection from evil, 10' radius, always active
teleportation without error

tongues

Archons are never surprised when in the Seven Heavens.
Other combat characteristics vary according to the type of ar-
chon in question, and are given below.

Lantern Archons

If, in fact, there is any real army in the Seven Heavens, the lan-
tern archons would be its foot soldiers. Lantern archons appear
much like softly glowing, yellow spheres of light about three feet
in diameter. They are little more than globes of energy that carry
out the will of the powers of the Seven Heavens. They are capable
of shooting out rays of light that inflict 1-6 points of damage on a
successful hit. They may fire two such rays per round out to 30
feet and ignore any range modifiers. This is their only attack form
and they will use it against evil intruders and to defend them-
selves,

Lantern archons are also immune to attacks from nonmagical
weapons. Because they have no substance, all magical weapons
do but half damage to them.

Because lantern archons are the ‘foot soldiers’ of the Seven
Heavens, they are often the first to encounter whatever trouble
may enter that plane of law and good. There is always a hound
Archon

archon who is in mental contact with several lantern archons. If a
lantern archon is engaged in combat or fleeing from danger, there
is a 75% chance that the hound archon who is monitoring it will
realize the danger and teleport to the area.

Lantern archons are the least powerful of the archons. They are
the spirits of the newly dead and, when necessary, serve as the
rank-and-file of the Seven Heavens. They are the primary foot
soldiers of the plane's armies and there are known to be virtually
countless numbers of these radiant servants.

The plane of Seven Heavens has little need for an army since
most evil creatures cannot even access the plane. But occasionally
some get through and then a war of defense is waged. Of greater
threat are the evil and true neutrals that inhabit the middle
planes. These beings are as treacherous as their whims make them
and often have the ability to travel the upper and lower planes.

Hound Archons

The strange looking hound archons are responsible for greeting
friendly guests to the Seven Heavens. Hound archons have hu-
manoid forms with dog-like heads and powerful fists. They, like
most archons, will rarely enter combat except to protect the
plane, themselves, or one of their lantern archons. In combat
they are capable of attacking with a weapon or a devastating ar-
ray of natural attacks. They can strike with they two powerful
fists causing 1-4 points of damage per hit and their bite causing 1-
8 points of damage per hit. Hound archons tend to prefer their
natural attacks instead of weapons.

The hound archons can also shape change into any type of dog
or wolf, though not a lycanthrope. When in this form they re-
ceive all the benefits of the animal plus they maintain their spell-
like abilities and special attacks. Hound archons are immune to
attacks from nonmagical weapons.

With a responsibility as guardians for the lantern archons, the
hound archons are frequently found wandering the lower layers
of the Seven Heavens keeping a watchful eye over things. Each
hound archon (there are believed to be at least 100,000 of them)
has a symbiotic link with up to 100 lantern archons. It is through
this link that word can rapidly be spread about the Seven Heav-
ens when there is trouble. Once in combat on its home ground, a
hound archon can expect 1-10 lantern archons to teleport to his
assistance per round until all 100 have arrived on the scene.

Hound archons also have the job of greeting friendly guests
upon their arrival to the Seven Heavens. The treatment the guests
receive depends on the nature of their visit. Being a lawful society,
the Seven Heavens aren't fond of ‘unexpected surprises.

Warden Archons

Warden archons look like large grizzly bears with human
hands and clear, intelligent-looking eyes. Warden archons pos-
sess the powerful attack forms of a bear. Their human hands have
the power and consistency of claws and each do 1-8 points of
damage per hit. Their vicious bite is capable of 2-12 points of
damage on a successful hit. If both of the hand attacks hit, the vic-
tim is entrapped in a mighty bear-hug and will take 1-10 points of
damage per round from the hug. The archon’s bite attack will be
at a +4 bonus to hit the entrapped victim. In order to break free
of a warden archon’s bear-hug, a victim must make a successful
bend bars/lift gates roll. Until free, a bear-hug victim may not use
his arms to fight or to cast spells with somatic components.

Warden archons also have the ability to use certain wizard
spells of the lesser/greater divination school and certain priest
spells of the divination sphere. They may use any spells from that
school and sphere that are 4th level or lower. They may cast any
of these spells at will, but each spell can only be cast once per day.
Spells are cast as if by an 8th level wizard or priest.

Warden archons are never surprised and are affected only by

MC8

+2 or better magical weapons.

Sages can only speculate on the true purpose of warden ar-
chons. To mortals, these curious creatures have neither rhyme
nor reason to their existence. This would not be unusual in any
society except the rigid lawful good of the Seven Heavens.

With their ability to cast divination spells, warden archons ap-
pear to be watchmen and observers in the Heavens. They often
report their findings directly to one of the tome archons; which
would seem unnecessary in light of the near omniscience of those
beings.

Sword Archons

Sword archons appear as humanoids with large feathered
wings instead of arms. If necessary, a sword archon can attack
four times per round with its powerful bite. Each bite inflicts 2-8
points of damage. The sword archon may also perform a dive at-
tack. It must dive at least 100 feet. Damage from a dive attack is
2-20 points. When diving, the AC of a sword archon is considered
to be —8 for the round due to its great velocity. Sword archons
may also cast spells as if they were 15th-level priests with major
access to all spheres. Their spells require no verbal, somatic, or
material component. They are merely cast at will. Sword archons
are immune to all weapons save those of +2 or greater magical
enchantment.

In addition to being the leaders of the hounds and wardens, the
sword archons are messengers between powers and deities of the
Seven Heavens. They fly from layer to layer of the Seven Heav-
ens with great speed, delivering the very will of the deities found
there. There are at least 1,000 of these archons known to exist.

Tome Archons

Tome archons are humanoids with arms and feathered wings
protruding from their back; tome archons have very hawk-like
heads. The aloof and dignified nature of the tome archon dis-
guises an able combatant. The primary attack mode of tome ar-
chons is a ray of light that issues from their hands, never missing,
inflicting 1-10 points of damage per ray. They can fire their light
ray attack twice per round, at any targets in sight.

In addition to those available to all archons, tome archons
have the following spell-like abilities:

e ESP, always active
e know alignment, always active
* detect lie, always active

These powerful champions of good are immune to damage
from weapons that are not at least of +3 magical enchantment.
They can cast spells (with major access to all spheres) and affect
undead as if they were 20th-level priests. Spells may only be cast
one every other round, and no spell more than twice in a day.

Remote and indifferent, the tome archons are the historians
and record keepers of the Seven Heavens. They record all things
that happen in the Heavens with passionless accuracy and total
indifference.

There are only seven tome archons, one on each of the layers of
the Seven Heavens. These fantastic creatures seem to have a near
omniscience that extends to the infinite reaches of their layer, and
they are aware of all things at once that occur on it.

These beings are the greatest of the archons and, among the ser-
vants of the deities, lesser in power only to the devas, planetars,
and solars.

Habitat/Society: Archons are the primary inhabitants of the
Seven Heavens, and as such, perform a number of roles. Al-
though there is a distinct hierarchy among the varieties of archon,
there is no rivalry or jealousy there. Each has its own role to fulfill
and that is recognition enough for an archon.

 

 

 
Baatezu

MC8

 

i> SSS Se + SS eS eee ee ee ee ee
a The baatezu are the primary inhabitants of the Nine Hells.

They are a strong, evil tempered race held together by equally
strong organization. The baatezu live in a rigid caste system
where authority is derived not only from power, but from sta-
tion. And changes in station come, most often, from participa-
tion in the Blood War. If a baatezu performs a great feat that
cripples the efforts of the tanar’ri, he is likely to be rewarded by
being promoted to a higher station. But most often, promotion
comes from the high attrition rate amongst the upper ranks.

In appearance, the baatezu are very diverse, though a gothic
gargoyle-like look is somewhat common. They are grotesque and
unsightly by human standards.

The goals of the baatezu—though seemingly one-tracked—run
very deep. First and foremost, the baatezu wish to fulfill their an-
cient quest and destroy the tanar'ri, their blood enemies. But still,
it should be noted, this is not merely a war of annihilation, but
rather a definition of existence. Also, the baatezu have recently
(by their immortal standards) noticed a small but interesting
group of beings: mankind. The baatezu know that by infiltrating
men and entering their world they will gain power over the
tanar'ri. Toward this end they constantly strive to dominate the
Prime Material plane and its natives. By convincing the men and
women of the Prime Material plane that the baatezu have godlike
powers, they hope to gain followers.

The baatezu are divided into greater, lesser, and least.

Greater baatezu _ Lesser baatezu Least baatezu
amnizu abishai nupperibo
cornugon barbazu spinagon
gelugon erinyes
pit fiend hamatula

osyluth

The lemures are so lowly, they don’t even qualify as ‘least’ in
the baatezu scheme. They are the very bottom baatezu in station.

Combat: All baatezu except for lemures, nupperibo, and spina-
gon are able to perform the following spell-like abilities, once per
round, at will:

* advanced illusion

* animate dead

* charm person

® infravision

* know alignment, always active
* suggestion

© teleport without error

The baatezu are able to summon their fellows, as detailed in
their individual descriptions. Because they have a special form of
telepathy, baatezu are able to understand and converse with any
intelligent creature.

Only least and lesser baatezu can be hit by nonmagical weap-
ons. The other varieties of baatezu can be struck by magical
weapons, or weapons of silver, but ordinary arms do them no
harm. Baatezu are affected by the following attack forms:

Attack Damage Attack Damage

acid full cold half*
electricity (lightning) full fire (dragon, magical) none*

gas (poisonous, etc.) half iron weapon nonet
magic missile full poison none
silver weapon fullt

“the gelugon takes half damage from fire and none from cold.
tunless affected by normal weapons, in which case damage will
be according to weapon type.

tgreater baatezu take only half damage from silver weapons.

Sigils: The baatezu can travel to any of the Nine Hells, any lower
plane, or even the Astral plane. However, they cannot enter the
Prime Material plane unless properly summoned. Least and lesser
baatezu have a combination of sigils that, when inscribed and a
gate spell cast, will bind them to service for nine days, keeping the
creatures from harming the caster. The greater baatezu can like-
wise be commanded or kept at bay for nine hours.

Dominion in the Nine Hells: The baatezu follow a very rigid
chain of command where the more powerful and high ranking
creatures have control over larger numbers of lesser creatures, In
addition to power, high station grants another advantage: free-
dom. Although every baatezu possesses the ability to travel to
any of the layers of the Nine Hells, they dare not do so unless
commanded by a superior. Only those individuals who are con-
sidered “commanders” can travel freely from layer to layer. The
powerful pit fiends can, of course, go wherever they please.

Avernus: Because it is the topmost layer of the Nine Hells, this
place is the most heavily guarded and populated with mass num-
bers of lesser baatezu. In this infinite stretch of rocky wasteland
and great mountainous crags can be found vast armies of the
lowly lemure. It is not uncommon for an army of 10,000 or more
lemure to be lead by a nupperibo. Patrolling the emptiness of
Avernus is an army of 1,000 barbazu lead by the pit fiend Bel.
This force is sent to the scene of any sort of invasion or rebellion,
such as when the tanar'ri have been bold enough to attempt an in-
vasion of Avernus. Their token force has been quickly destroyed
on each attempt, with Bel receiving great honors each time.

Middle Layers: The seven middle layers of the Nine Hells are
generally considered equal in status. In these layers, the least and
lesser baatezu comprise the armies and the greater baatezu form
the commander core. Their primary purpose is to guard each
layer from invasion and to mobilize against the tanar’ri. Also, itis
not uncommon for a pit fiend ruler here to mobilize his army cov-
ertly against another ruler. As long as there is no trace of the act,
then it is considered to have never happened.

Nessus:[t is unknown if there are “baatezu lords” that have ab-
solute rulership in the Nine Hells, but if there are, they surely rule
from Nessus, the plane's ninth and deepest layer. Nessus is where
the greatest number of the powerful pit fiends live. They are
based out of Malsheem, a huge iron fortress in the “center” of
Nessus. It is unknown if they are the lords of the keep or if they
are but servants of some greater being.

Accession in the Nine Hells: The baatezu, with their evil, twisted
sense of honor, have a definite path of progress. By performing
deeds that further the cause of evil, one gains honors and station.
By gaining honors and station, one gains additional power. It is
this way that an enterprising spinagon might advance upward
and become an abishai. Though the transmutation process from
spinagon to abishai is long and torturous, it is a worthwhile sacri-
fice because of the potential for upward mobility. Often, too, a
baatezu might “disappear,” in which case its immediate subordi-
nate would take its place in the chain of command. Covert assas-
sination is quite common amongst the baatezu.

The Dark Eight:In the fortress of Malsheem on the layer of Nes-
sus there meet eight of the most powerful pit fiends in the Nine
Hells: Furcas, Baalzephon, Zimimar, Zapan, Zaebos, Corin, Da-
gos, and Pearza. They meet four times per year to determine pol-
icy in the Nine Hells. It is said that to draw the attention of these
eight powerful beings is to surely invite destruction upon one's
self. All war decisions and attacks on the tanar'ri originate from
this grim and evil council. Any promotions of particular baatezu
are decided by these ominous lords. Strangely, these eight rulers
have reigned for a great many years, seemingly not subject to the
assassinations that are so common amongst the upper ranks.

 
Baatezu—Lemure

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: The Nine Hells
FREQUENCY: Common
ORGANIZATION: Horde
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Semi- (2-4)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil
NO. APPEARING: 10-100
ARMOR CLASS: 7
MOVEMENT: 3

HIT DICE: 2

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-3
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Battle drive
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Regeneration
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: M (5’ tall)
MORALE: See below
XP VALUE: 120

The lowliest denizens of the Nine Hells, lemures are grotesque,
disfigured creatures. Their bodies are disgusting blobs of molten
flesh, with a vaguely humanoid torso and head. Their faces are
equally unrecognizable, with twisted, melted features, molded
into permanent expressions of horrid anguish. Sometimes, le-
mures will display some slight vestige of the mortal being they
were in life, be it some facial feature, nervous twitch, a small
shred of clothing, etc. However, these fragments of their former
lives become less and less apparent as the lemure undergoes its
tortured, wretched existence as the weakest baatezu in the Nine
Hells.

Lemures have no means of communicating, since they have no
minds.

Combat: Lemures will relentlessly attack anything they encoun-
ter in the Nine Hells that is not another baatezu unless ordered
otherwise. They attack regardless of the danger to themselves,
and thus need never check morale.

In combat, they claw for 1-3 points of damage. Their main
strength is in their large numbers. Often dozens of these beasts are
encountered, making combat with them long and drawn out as
the lemures attack in wave after wave until they either wear down
more powerful opponents or are themselves destroyed.

Lemures regenerate one hit point per melee round. Any piece of
a lemure, even its burnt ashes, will regenerate until the creature is
whole again. The only way to permanently destroy lemures is
with holy items (holy water, holy sword, etc.).

One particularly fearsome aspect of the lemures is called a bat-
tle drive. The battle drive is initiated by the higher baatezu lead-
ers in desperate situations when the success of the battle is more
important than the loss of great numbers of lemures. After all, the
other baatezu do not care about the lives of the lemures. When
the battle drive is used, a horde of lemures are formed into a
wedge formation of up to 1,000 or more lemures! Then, on com-
mand from a superior, the lemures begin a slow march toward
their goal or destination. As they arrive, the lemure are invari-
ably cut down by the dozens. Oblivious to their impending de-
struction, the lemures march mindlessly to their destination,

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

attacking with a +2 to their attack rolls. Eventually, the sheer
number of lemures prevail and the lowly lemures will take their
target. It is not uncommon for them to see 70-90% casualties
from a battle drive.

Lemures have no minds of their own, so they are immune to
any mind-affecting spells such as charm person or illusions. They
do not, however, have the spell-like abilities common to all
baatezu.

 

Habitat/Society: Lemures are wretched creatures, forever tor-
mented by the other baatezu. Their existence is both dismal and
insignificant.

They are found in the first two layers of the Nine Hells, where
they wander in large hordes, avoiding other baatezu and relent-
lessly attacking any intruders. On the rare occasions that the
Nine Hells receives visitors, they are most often met by masses of
roaming lemures. The lemures will mindlessly attack the in-
truders on sight. If alarmed, they will keep coming and coming,
seemingly without end. Sages have no reason to believe that there
is a finite number of Jemures on the Nine Hells.

Ecology: Occasionally, when there is need, a lemure is selected to
form a spinagon, a least baatezu. This is done randomly, and is
not based on merit, although sometimes—purely for the pleasure
of the baatezu involved—more than one lemure will be selected
for such a promotion. On such occasions the mindless lemure are
then pitted against each other in a brutal fight to the death for the
sporting fun of the attending baatezu. The winners of such a fight
are then either made into a spinagon or slaughtered outright, de-
pending on their entertainment value. Lemures are occasionally
chosen to form wraiths or spectres, as well. Other baatezu con-
sider the lemures so lowly that they are without merit.

 
Baatezu, Greater—Amnizu

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: The Nine Hells
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (15-16)
TREASURE: Vi¥
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil
NO. APPEARING: 1-2

ARMOR CLASS: =i
MOVEMENT: 6, F115 (C)
HIT DICE: 8

THACO: 11 (See below)

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGP/ATTACK: 2-8

 

 

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Energy channel, forget
SPECIAL DEFENSES: +2 or better weapons to hit
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 50%

SIZE: M (4’ tall)

MORALE: Elite (13-14)

XP VALUE: 32,500

The amnizu dwell primarily on Stygia, the fifth plane of the Nine
Hells. They are often found on the upper layers of the Nine Hells,
however, there to accomplish some unearthly mission.

The amnizu are rather gruesome and unseemly. They are short
(about 4 feet in height) with elongated, bald heads. They have
stubby legs and arms and large, leathery wings protruding from
their backs. Amnizu have pug noses and large eyes. Their snarl-
ing mouths are filled with jagged, razor-sharp teeth.

Amnizu use telepathic communication.

Combat: The amnizu are greater baatezu and as such, prefer not
to enter combat, but rather to leave that sort of thing to under-
lings. But if pressed into battle, the amnizu will prove able foes.
Their touch alone is enough to cause 2-8 points of damage to any
creature. Because this channeling of harmful energy precludes ar-
mor, the amnizu need only attack versus armor class 10 to cause
damage. Any magical pluses of armor, shield, or protective de-
vice such as a ring of protection, will lower the “adjusted” armor
class of the defender. Other magical items which give a base ar-
mor class are unaffected. For example, if an amnizu were attack-
ing a foe wearing plate mail, it would only need to roll versus
armor class 10 to hit. However, if the amnizu were attacking
someone with chain mail +1 and bracers of defense, AC 4, it
would need to attack versus armor class 3.

Because of the amnizu’s close ties to the river Styx, their attacks
also will have the affect of an extremely powerful forget spell,
causing its opponent to forget one whole day's memory unless he
saves vs. spells.

In addition to those available to all baatezu, an amnizu can use
the following spell-like abilities, one per round, at will:

* fireball, 3 times per day
* imprisonment, 1 time per day

A holy word is required to drive an amnizu back to its own
plane.

Amnizu can attempt to gate in the following: 2-20 abishai (50 %
chance, once per day) or 1-8 erinyes (30% chance, once per day).

 

 

 

 

 

Habitat/Society: The amnizu are greater baatezu, and as such en-
joy a nobility of sorts. Although not of the same station as the
mighty pit fiends, the amnizu are part of the ruling class of the
Nine Hells.

Amnizu are extremely hateful of outsiders to the Nine Hells
and even of those creatures native to that plane. They will follow
orders not so much because of their nature, but because of their
desire to advance and their fear of the pit fiends. It is a commonly
known fact that the higher one advances in the Nine Hells, the
more closely one is observed by the Dark Eight. Given the oppor-
tunity, however, amnizu will order their minions to attack any-
thing that enters the domain that is under the control of the Dark
Eight. It is possible that an amnizu would even attack a pit fiend
given sufficient reason and if it thought it could do so without be-
ing suspected.

The amnizu serve many purposes. First and foremost, they are
the guardians of the river Styx. The mighty river enters the Nine
Hells through Stygia as well as Avernus. This is rightly seen as a
weak point of defense for the Nine Hells. The amnizu are en-
trusted with the important task of keeping foolish individuals out
of the Nine Hells. Second, they are generals. A single amnizu will
typically command a great army of thousands of abishai and eri-
nyes. To their own perverse ends as well as the protection of Sty-
gia, the amnizu deploy their massive armies.

Ecology: The amnizu are given the important task of bringing
new souls to the Nine Hells, and thus they are given their power
of imprisonment. Mortal men and women traveling to the Nine
Hells from the Prime Material plane for the purpose of combating
evil are generally fodder for the amnizu.
Baatezu, Greater—Cornugon

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: The Nine Hells

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Exceptiona! (15-16)

TREASURE: D,S

ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil

NO. APPEARING: 1-4

ARMOR CLASS: =2

MOVEMENT: 9, Fl 18 (C)

HIT DICE: 10

THACO: 11

NO. OF ATTACKS: 4 or 1 + weapon

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4/1-4/2-5/1-3 or 1-3 + weapon +6
(strength bonus)

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Fear, wounding, stun

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Regeneration, +2 or better weapons
to hit

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 50%

SIZE: L (9" tall)

MORALE: Elite (13-14)

XP VALUE: 36,500

Cornugons are very powerful amongst the greater baatezu. It is
their lot to find service in the elite defense forces of the Nine Hells.
In appearance they are frightening enough to fulfill that role.
Fully 9 feet tall, these creatures are a only vaguely humanoid,
covered with grotesque scales. Their huge wings and snaking,
prehensile tail add to their frightening demeanor. In combat, they
favor a large barbed whip, but often carry other, more gruesome
weapons.
Cornugons communicate telepathically.

Combat: Cornugons are fearless fighters, rarely retreating from
combat even in the face of overwhelming odds. They have 18/00
strength (+6 damage adjustment). The cornugon will always at-
tack with its tail, lashing out for 1-3 points of damage, creating a
wound that will continue to bleed for 1 hit point of damage per
round until treated. In addition, they will either attack with claws
and bite or with a weapon. Their large, barbed whip deals out 1-6
points of damage on a successful hit and the victim must make a
saving throw vs. paralyzation, or be stunned for 1-4 melee
rounds. Even unarmed, the beast is capable devastating attacks.
It can attack with two claw attacks for 1-4 points of damage per
hit and a bite for 2-5 points of damage per hit (plus its tail attack).

In addition to those available to all baatezu, cornugons can use
any one of the following spell-like powers at will, once per round,
at will:

e detect magic

« ESP

* lightning bolt, 3 times per day
« produce flame

® pyrotechnics

* wall of fire, 1 time per day

They can also attempt to gate in the following: 2-12 barbazu
(50% chance, once per day), 2-16 abishai (35% chance, once per
day) or 1-3 additional cornugons (20% chance, once per day).

All cornugons radiate a fear aura in a 5 foot radius. Anyone en-
tering the fear radius must make a saving throw vs. rod, staff, or

MC8

 

 

 

 

generate 2 hit points per melee round.

wand or flee in terror for 1-6 melee rounds. Cornugons also re- @

Habitat/Society: Cornugons are the elite fighting force in the Nine
Hells. They are often formed into terrifying armies up to 2,000
strong! Only the mighty pit fiends may lead these hideous fight-
ing forces into battle. The cornugons are prized personal guard-
ians. As such, all pit fiends and gelugons try to obtain one or
more cornugons as personal retainers. The Dark Eight have 106
cornugons as retinue.

The cornugon armies are usually formed only in the lower few
layers of the Nine Hells. In the upper layers, individuals serve as
generals to vast armies of lesser baatezu. This duty is the most de-
sirable (and most subject to rapid advancement) second only to
guardian duty among the Dark Eight.

Ecology: The cornugons are greater baatezu, and as such enjoy a
certain amount of prestige across the Nine Hells. Of all the
baatezu, the cornugons have the most rapid advancement. With
several successful campaigns to their credit, more heroic cornu-
gons will receive promotions to the upper layers of the Nine Hells
where they command vast, gruesome legions of baatezu. From
there, great action leads to promotion to gelugon, the ruthless
baatezu inhabitants of the frigid layer of Caina. Although power-
ful and cunning, the cornugons are the baatezu least likely to dis-
play treachery amongst their ranks, due most likely to their
militaristic nature. Their loyalty makes them something of an un-
usual asset in the Nine Hells. It is said that the 106 cornugons that
guard the Dark Eight are completely loyal and would give their
lives in defense of the council, behavior that is nearly unheard of
in the Nine Hells. Whether this is due to genuine loyalty or fear of
the almost limitless power of the pit fiends is unknown. What is
known, however, is that never in the history of the Dark Eight has
a cornugon guardian displayed traitorous behavior.

 

 
Baatezu, Greater—Gelugon

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: The Nine Hells (Caina)

FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Genius (17-18)

TREASURE: A, W

ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil

NO. APPEARING: 1-8

ARMOR CLASS: —3

MOVEMENT: 15

HIT DICE: 11

THACO: Q

NO. OF ATTACKS: 4

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4/1-4/2-8/3-12 +4 (strength
bonus)

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Tail freeze, fear

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Regeneration, +2 or better weapons
to hit

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 50%

SIZE: H (12’ tall)

. MORALE: Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: 39,500

Gelugons are the ferocious baatezu that live in frigid Caina. In
terms of appearance, gelugons are the most alien of the baatezu.
They have extremely large, insectlike bodies towering a full 12
feet tall! They have great claws on their hands and feet and large,
sharp pinchers at their mouth. Their heads bulge with great,
multi-faceted eyes. As their most formidable weapon, gelugons
have long, thick tails covered with razor-sharp spikes. They are
indeed fearsome looking baatezu, commanding the respect of all
their peers in the Nine Hells.
Gelugons communicate telepathically.

Combat: Gelugons are greater baatezu in every sense, favoring to
attack and torment victims with their claws, pinchers and tail
rather than use a weapon. They are extremely strong, with 18/76
strength (+4 damage adjustment). In combat, they can unleash
four separate devastating attacks per round. Their two claws
score 1-4 hit points of damage each upon a successful hit. The gi-
ant pinchers in their mouth do 2-8 points of damage per hit. But
the most fearsome of their attacks is their large tail, which radi-
ates cold like the wind of Caina itself. If the tail hits, it does 3-12
points of damage and the victim struck must make a saving throw
vs. paralyzation or be paralyzed by numbing cold for 1-6 rounds.
The gelugon can direct all four of its attacks against different op-
ponents if it chooses.

About 25% carry great spears that inflict 2-12 points of dam-
age. Those struck must make a saving throw vs. paralyzation or
be numbed by cold (slowed for 2-8 rounds).

In addition to those available to all baatezu, the gelugon can use
these spell-like powers at will, once per round, at will:

® detect invisibility, always active
* detect magic

* fly

* polymorph self

* wall of ice

In addition, they can attempt to gate in the following: 2-12 bar-
bazu (50% chance, once per day), 2-8 osyluth (35% chance, once
per day), or 1-2 gelugons (20% chance, once per day). Because
the gelugons are the guardians of the front door of the Nine Hells’
lowest layer, there is a 25% chance that a pit fiend will come and

 

 

 

 

 

 

aid them if the gelugons are losing in combat.

Gelugons can see perfectly in total darkness, are able to regener-
ate 2 hit points per round. They radiate fear in a 10’ radius (saving
throw vs. rod, staff, wand or flee in panic for 1-6 melee rounds).

Habitat/Society: Gelugons hold an important position in the Nine
Hells. Aside from being second in power and station only to the
mighty pit fiends, gelugons are the guardians of Caina, the frigid
eighth layer of the Nine Hells. Because Caina is but a single layer
away from the heart of the Nine Hells, the pit fiends have placed
great importance on the task entrusted to the gelugons.

Gelugons are the only baatezu native to Caina. Although other
varieties of baatezu must occasionally come to this cold place,
they do not like it. Most baatezu are more at home on the hotter
layers of the Nine Hells. Gelugons are unique in baatezu society
since they are both the leaders and rank and file of the armies of
their layer. It is unknown how they decide amongst themselves
who is a leader and who is not.

From Caina, there is but one way to reach the fortress of Mal-
sheem on Nessus, the lowest layer of the Nine Hells. The portal is
at the bottom of a great hole on Caina, surrounded by a group of
9,999 gelugons who guard this portal at all times.

Ecology: As noted earlier, gelugons are the most unusual of all
baatezu in appearance. They often use the shock value of their
appearance to advantage when dealing with others. Wholly un-
natural creatures, gelugons can only be created by promotion
from lower stations. When a gelugon has performed well in its
task, it may be promoted and become a pit fiend. Such a promo-
tion, however, is very difficult to obtain. First, the gelugon must
have served flawlessly for 777 years. Any blemish on its record,
even the slightest one, will eliminate it from the promotion list.
But 777 years of perfect service is the easy part—if the gelugon is
selected to become a pit fiend, it is thrown into the Pit of Flame
where it is tormented for 1,001 days. After almost three years of
hideous, painful torture, the creature that crawled into the pit a
gelugon crawls out of it a pit fiend.
Baatezu, Greater—Pit Fiend

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: The Nine Hells

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Genius (17-18)

TREASURE: G, W

ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil

NO. APPEARING: 1-4

ARMOR CLASS: =5

MOVEMENT: 15, Fl 24 (C)

HIT DICE: 13

THACO: 7

NO. OF ATTACKS: 6

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4/1-4/1-6/1-6/2-12/2-8 or weapon
+6 (strength bonus)

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Fear, poison, tail constriction

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Regeneration, +3 or better weapons
to hit

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 50%

SIZE: L (12' tall)

MORALE: Fearless (19-20)

XP VALUE: $7,500

The most terrible baatezu of the Nine Hells, pit fiends appear to
be giant, winged humanoids, very gargoylish in appearance.
Their huge wings can wrap around their body in defense. Their
fangs are large and dripping with vile, green liquid. Their bodies
are red and scaly, often emitting flames when they are angered or
excited.

In the rare instances they choose to communicate, they do so
using telepathy.

Combat: No baatezu is more terrifying in combat than a mighty
pit fiend. In physical combat, the pit fiend is capable of dealing
out tremendous punishment, using its incredible 18/00 strength
(+6 damage adjustment). They can attack six times in a single
round, dividing its attacks against up to six different opponents.
They can attack with two hard, scaly wing buffets for 1-4 points
of damage per hit. Their powerful claws do 1-6 points of damage
per successful attack. The bite of a pit fiend is dreadful indeed,
causing any creature bitten to take 2-12 points of damage and re-
ceive a lethal dose of poison. A saving throw vs. poison is re-
quired or the victim will die in 1-4 rounds. The bite also is 100%
likely to infect the victim with a disease whether he saves against
the poison or not.

Pit fiends can also attack with their tail every round, inflicting
2-8 points of damage per hit. The tail can then hold and constrict
the victim for a like amount of damage per round until the victim
makes a successful strength check to break free. Pit fiends can
also carry jagged-toothed clubs which inflict 7-12 points of dam-
age per hit (this replaces one claw attack).

Once per round a pit fiend can use one of the following spell-
like powers, plus those available to all baatezu:

* detect magic

* detect invisibility

* fireball

hold person
improved invisibility
polymorph self
produce flame
pyrotechnics

wall of fire

 

 

 

 

 

 

They can, once per year, cast a wish spell. They may always
gate gate in two lesser baatezu, or one greater baatezu with a
100% chance of success, performing this action once per round.
Once per day, a pit fiend can use a symbol of pain—the victim
must save vs. rod, staff or wand or suffer a —4 penalty on attack
dice and a —2 penalty to dexterity for 2-20 rounds.

They regenerate 2 hit points per round. Pit fiends also radiate a
fear aura in a 20 foot radius (save versus rod, staff, or wand at a
—3 penalty or flee in panic for 1-10 rounds).

Habitat/Society: Pit fiends are the lords of the Nine Hells. They
are the baatezu with the greatest power and station. Pit fiends are
found throughout the various layers of the Nine Hells, but are
very rare on the upper layers. They also are not fond of the frigid
coldness of Caina, the eighth layer. Pit fiends are very rare on
Avernus, Dis, Minauros, and Caina. They are rare on Phle-
gethos, Stygia, Malbolge, and Maladomini. In the fearful realm
of Nessus, however, the dreaded pit fiends are common.

Wherever they are found, these mighty lords hold a position of
great authority and power, They sometimes will command vast
legions consisting of dozens of complete armies, leading the hate-
ful horde into battle against the Tanar’ri. These huge forces are
terrifying to behold, and any non-native of the lower planes of
less than 10 hit dice who sees them will flee in panic for 1-3 days.
Those of 10 hit dice and greater must make a saving throw vs.
rod, staff, or wand or flee in panic for 1-12 turns.

It is rumored that pit fiends are not the most powerful beings in
the Nine Hells, but rather themselves servants of some greater
power. If, in fact, there are some greater beings in the Nine Hells,
certainly they are powerful enough to hide their presence from
mere mortal sages.

Ecology: Pit fiends are spawned from the powerful gelugons of
the Nine Hells’ eighth layer. When those icy fiends are found wor-
thy they are cast into the Pit of Flame for 1,001 days after which
they emerge as a pit fiend (see Gelugon for more detail).

 

 

 

 
Baatezu, Least—Nupperibo

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: __ The Nine Hells
FREQUENCY: Common
ORGANIZATION: Army
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Nil
INTELLIGENCE: Non- (0)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil
NO. APPEARING: 10-100
ARMOR CLASS: 9
MOVEMENT: 6

HIT DICE: 1

THACO: 19

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2 or 1 (by weapon)
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-2/1-2 or by weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Regeneration
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: M (5' tall)
MORALE: See below

XP VALUE: 65

Nupperibos are a form of dead in the Nine Hells, slightly higher in
station than the lemures. They are lowly and woeful beings, used
as fighting, feeding, and tormenting stock by all baatezu from the
pit fiends on down.

Nupperibos are much like lemures in appearance, but are even
less defined than those creatures. Nupperibos are amorphous,
vaguely humanoid monsters with no discernible features. They
have appendages that might be construed as their arms and head.

Combat: Nupperibos, much like the lemures, will attack any non-
baatezu they encounter in the Nine Hells, heedless of their own
safety. They need never make a morale check, for they will fight
until destroyed.

A nupperibo attacks with two claws for 1-2 points of damage
per hit. In some instances, when they are formed into vast, infer-
nal armies, they are given weapons, though seldom anything
more advanced than a club. In these cases, they do damage as per
weapon type.

Nupperibos are blind, deaf, and unable to speak. They regener-
ate one hit point per round in the Nine Hells or any other lower
plane. Any piece of a nupperibo, including its burnt ashes, will
regenerate. The only way to permanently destroy one is by using
something holy (holy water, holy sword, etc.).

Because they are mindless, nupperibos are immune to all mind
affecting spells such as charm person or illusions. Of the special
powers common to all baatezu, the nupperibo may only use
cause fear, and that only when at least 10 nupperibo are all at-
tacking the same defender and they are ordered to do so.

Habitat/Society: Nupperibos exist by the hundreds of thousands
on the first and second layers of the Nine Hells. They are the re-
mains of all lawful evil creatures not sufficiently malignant to be

 

 

 

 

changed into lemures. Because of their completely mindless na-
ture, they simply obey all orders given them, thus are accorded.a
slightly higher station than lemures (they are considered least
baatezu). There is, however, a unique relationship between the le-
mures and the nupperibos. The nupperibos are considered to be
slightly higher in station than the lemures, but they will never be-
come higher forms of baatezu without first being demoted to le-
mure status. This is a curious connection between the two types
of creatures. Doubtless some greater power in the Nine Hells has
set the advancement path that way for his own fiendish reasons.

Nupperibos readily obey all commands given them in order to
lessen the torment that is their lot in the Nine Hells.

Nupperibos are commonly used as trading stock to the yugo-
loths (q.v.) in return for their mercenary services. Like the
baatezu, the yugoloths treat the nupperibos horribly and will ulti-
mately consume them.

Ecology: They are, however, sensitive to mental commands from
stronger baatezu and will never disobey those commands. Nup-
peribos have no intelligence.

When a nupperibo is destroyed, it will be reformed into an-
other nupperibo. However, there is a 1% chance that it will be-
come a lemure. Although this means a reduction in station
(however slight), it also means a chance to become a spinagon in
the future.

Whether left in the Nine Hells or traded to yugoloths, nupperi-
bos lead a completely wretched existence and are not considered
significant by lower planar creatures.
Baatezu, Least—Spinagon

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: The Nine Hells
FREQUENCY: Common
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average to very (8-12)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil
NO. APPEARING: 1 or 1-3
ARMOR CLASS: 4
MOVEMENT: 6, Fl 18 (C)
HIT DICE: 3+3

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4/1-4/by weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Flame spikes
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 15%

SIZE: S (3! tall)
MORALE: Average (8-10)
XP VALUE: 7,900

The spinagon are the smallest of the baatezu. In appearance,
spinagons look much like gargoyles—small humanoids with
wings and a spiked tail. They often carry small military forks or
other nasty weapons. As natural weapons, spinagons have long,
razor-sharp talons extending from their feet.

Spinagon's communicate using telepathy.

Combat: Spinagons will not enter combat if they can avoid it,
preferring to flee scenes of trouble in order to notify more power-
ful baatezu of the disturbance. However, spinagons can be fairly
potent combatants. They usually carry a small military fork (use
the statistics of a javelin) that strikes for 1-6 points of damage.
While in flight, the spinagon can also rake with the claws on its
feet for 1-4 points of damage per successful hit.

Protruding from the spinagon’s body are small spines and
spikes that are effective weapons in combat. The spinagon can
launch up to 12 of these spikes as projectiles while in flight, but no
more than 2 in a single round. The spikes burst into flame when
released from the body, causing flammable materials to catch fire
upon contact. For purposes of range and damage, a spinagon’s
spikes are treated as darts. In melee, 1-4 spikes can wound an op-
ponent if the baatezu chooses to hurl itself upon an antagonist.
Hits are automatic, but no other attack is possible.

Although they do not receive the spell-like abilities common to
other baatezu, spinagons can use the following spell-like powers
one at a time, once per round, at will:

affect normal fires
change self
command
produce flame
scare

stinking cloud

They can attempt to gate in 1-3 additional spinagons (35%
chance of success, once per day).

Habitat/Society: Spinagons are very common throughout the
layers of the Nine Hells, though they are particularly plentiful in
the middle layers, three through seven. These creatures serve as
messengers and lackeys for more powerful baatezu, which in-
cludes just about all of them. Spinagons are loyal messengers, al-
most never failing to properly deliver a letter or memorized

 

 

 

 

 

missive. They are, however, scorned by many baatezu because
they are weak and ill-equipped for combat.

Indirectly, the spinagons act as scouts for the Nine Hells. Be-
cause of the vast number of messages to deliver and errands to
run that the spinagons have, there will usually be one just about
everywhere in the plane. If one of these wretched, cowardly crea-
tures discovers unauthorized intruders in the Nine Hells, they will
immediately fly off to call a more powerful baatezu. They will
never directly attack any intruders and will not fight unless cor-
nered and unable to barter their way out. A spinagon would not,
however, compromise its message to avoid combat.

Another duty of the spinagons is the herding of lemures. The
spinagons will herd hundreds of the disgusting lemures and form
large armies. They will often herd nupperibo to form an infernal
horde, as well. When wars between the baatezu and tanar'ri rage,
the spinagons are very busy creatures, forming armies for the
more powerful baatezu. Usually scorned by the other baatezu,
the spinagons find themselves the object of respect when a greater
baatezu is looking to have its army formed quickly.

Ecology: Spinagons, though lowly, are in a position to gain status
quickly. Because they often gather armies for greater baatezu,
they can increase their status by performing the task quickly. Of-
ten, this leads to less influential baatezu getting their armies
formed last, and the more important baatezu getting their armies
immediately. Because of this, spinagons can advance quickly, but
they are subject to abuse and even destruction by middle level
baatezu disappointed with their performance.

The Nine Hells is a strange place, ruled by a perverse discipline
that simultaneously encourages both structured behavior and
treachery. But stranger still is the advancement process of the
spinagon. When a spinagon is selected for advancement, those
who have been served by it are given say as to how much ad-
vancement the spinagon receives. Therefore, if a spinagon serves
a gelugon well, it may be promoted as high as amnizu. Stories tell
of the pit fiend Greth advancing a spinagon to a hamatula!

 

 

 
Baatezu, Lesser—Abishai

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

& Black Green Red
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: The Nine Hells The Nine Hells The Nine Hells
FREQUENCY: Common Common Common
ORGANIZATION: Solitary Solitary Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any Any
DIET: Carnivore Carnivore Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10) Average (8-10) Average (8-10)
TREASURE: Nil Nil Nil
ALIGNMENT: Lawful Evil Lawful evil Lawful evil
NO. APPEARING: 2-20 2-8 1
ARMOR CLASS: § 3 1
MOVEMENT: 9, Fl 12 (C) 9, Fl 12 (C) 9, Fl 12 (C)
HIT DICE: 4+] 5+2 6+3
THACO: 17 15 13
NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 3 3

1-4/1-4/2-5 1-4/1-4/2-5 1-4/1-4 /2-5

DAMAGE/ATTACK:
a SPECIAL ATTACKS:
SPECIAL DEFENSES:

Poison, dive

regeneration

+1 or better weapons to hit,

Poison, dive
+1 or better weapons to hit,
regeneration

Poison, dive
+1 or better weapons to hit,
regeneration

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 30% 30% 30%

SIZE: L (8' tall) L (7’ tall) M (6' tall)
MORALE: Average (8-10) Average (8-10) Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 21,500 23,500 25,500

 

 

 

 

 

 

ag are common to the first and second layers of the Nine
ells,

The abishai appear much like gothic gargoyles. They are thin
and reptilian, with long, prehensile tails and great wings. There
are three varieties of abishai and the skin color of the creature is
dependent on the variety. They are—in ascending order of
station—black, green, and red.

Abishai communicate using telepathy.

Combat: In battle, the abishai can strike with its formidable
claws, inflicting 1-4 points of damage per successful hit. It can
also lash out with its flexible tail for 2-5 points of damage. Hidden
in the end of an abishai's tail is a small stinger that injects poison
into its enemy on a successful hit, requiring a saving throw vs.
poison (failure resulting in death).

Abishai can fly high into the air and dive at their enemies, strik-
ing with both claws. Their attack roll is made at +2 with a suc-
cessful hit doing double damage.

In addition to the powers possessed by all baatezu, an abishai
can perform the following spell-like powers one at a time, once
per round:

change self
command
produce flame
pyrotechnics
scare

They can also attempt to gate 2-12 lemures (60% chance of suc-
cess, once per day) or 1-3 abishai (30% chance of success, once
per day).

All abishai are susceptible to damage from holy water. If a vial
is splashed on it, the abishai will take 2-8 points of damage. All
abishai regenerate one hit point per melee round unless the dam-
age was done by holy water or a holy magical weapon.

Habitat/Society: Abishai are voracious and evil. They delight in
tormenting those few natives to the Nine Hells that are lower in
power than themselves. Abishai are fond of tempting mortals
bold enough to travel to the Nine Hells by using their change self
and charm person abilities.

Ecology: The abishai comprise the main body of many large, evil
armies battling against the tanar’ri and intruders against the Nine
Hells. In some cases, a red abishai may have proven himself wor-
thy enough to command a force of lemures. If it is successful in
this endeavor, the red abishai may be promoted to a higher form
of baatezu.
Baatezu, Lesser—Barbazu

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: The Nine Hells
FREQUENCY: Common
ORGANIZATION: Troupe

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)

TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil

NO. APPEARING: 20-100

ARMOR CLASS: 3

MOVEMENT: 15

HIT DICE: 6+6

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 or 1 (weapon)
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-2/1-2/1-8 or 2-12 (weapon)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Glaive, disease, battle frenzy
SPECIAL DEFENSES: +1 or better weapons to hit
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 30%

SIZE: M (6' tall)

MORALE: Steady (11-12)

XP VALUE: 23,500

The barbazu is the most vile and effective soldier in the Nine
Hells. They are employed in large numbers as shock elite troops.

A barbazu is a foul, humanoid creature with a long tail, clawed
hands and feet, pointed ears, and a snaky, disgusting beard grow-
ing out of its face. Its skin is moist and scaly like a reptile. They
are most often seen carrying a cruel, saw-toothed glaive, capable
of great damage.

Though barbazu rarely find a need to communicate, they can
do so using telepathy.

Combat: The barbazu are the most violent of the baatezu, taking
advantage of any excuse to attack. This makes them unpopular
amongst baatezu-kind and subject to frequent, harsh disciplinary
measures. These same traits, however, make them excellent
shock troops. They are deployed in large armies sometimes num-
bering in the thousands both to guard the middle layers of the
Nine Hells and to launch devastating attacks against the tanar'ri.
They are also popular among the more powerful Baatezu to
guard personal treasure or one’s demesne.

The barbazu attacks with a saw-toothed glaive. This terrible
weapon not only inflicts 2-12 points of damage on a successful
hit, but the wound caused by the weapon will continue to bleed
each melee round until the wound is bound (or the victim dies).
The victim will continue to suffer 2 points of damage per round
until tended to. These bleeding glaive wounds are cumulative; 2
points of damage will be suffered per round per wound. If neces-
sary, however, the barbazu is capable of powerful natural at-
tacks. It can deal out two claw attacks for 1-2 points of damage
each and an attack with its wire-like beard for 1-8 points of dam-
age. If both claws manage to hit, the beard damage is an auto-
matic hit for maximum damage. Also, when the beard hits, there
is a 25% chance the victim will contract a disease from the foul at-
tack.

At will, one at a time, one per round, a barbazu can use the fol-
lowing spell-like powers in addition to those available to all
baatezu:

affect normal fires
command

fear, by touch
produce flame

eees

 

 

 

 

 

The barbazu can also attempt to gate in 2-12 abishai (50%
chance, once per day) or 1-6 additional barbazu (35% chance,
once per day).

All barbazu are subject to a battle frenzy. When in the heat of
combat, a group of barbazu is 10% likely per melee round to go
berserk. While berserk, the barbazu need not make morale
checks. They will attack twice as many times per round at +2 on
attack rolls and damage dice. Their armor class, however, will in-
crease by 3. The roll is cumulative per melee round, so that it they
are 20% likely to go berserk on the second round, 30% on the
third, etc. Once berserk, they will stay that way until combat

ceases.

Habitat/Society: The barbazu have no real internal society. They
are bred for battle, which is what they do best. All other denizens
of the Nine Hells know that barbazu are exceedingly cruel. Bar-
bazu will rush into combat whenever possible, and often will not
stop until either they or their opponent is dead. They are perhaps
the most impetuous and chaotic of the baatezu, and thus have
gained a very bad reputation among outsiders. However, even
the pit fiends themselves cannot deny the barbazu’s extreme value
in combat.

Although the barbazu is a lesser baatezu, they are never found
in command of their own armies. They are simply too chaotic
and are unfit to lead. Often, though, a barbazu that has proven
himself of exceptional worth will promoted to an osyluth. Most,
however, never survive to see promotion.

Ecology: As noted earlier, the barbazu serves only one function:
fighting. They are bred for combat and combat alone; they have
no other purpose and, therefore, no ecological structure other
than military. They are the bulk of the army of the middle layers
and the most common guards of the greater baatezu. They do not
fight out of any particular loyalty or comraderie, but rather out
of their violent need to hurt and kill.

 

 
Baatezu, Lesser—Erinyes

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: The Nine Hells
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Single
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: High (13-14)
TREASURE: See below
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 2
MOVEMENT: 12, FL 21 (C)
HIT DICE: 6+6

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: by weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Charm, fear, rope of entanglement
SPECIAL DEFENSES: +1 or better weapons to hit
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 30%

SIZE: M (6’ tall)
MORALE: Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 29,500

Erinyes are perhaps the most unusual of the baatezu since they do
not appear gruesome or disgusting. Rather, erinyes are attractive
to mortals, a fitting characteristic considering their mission. Eri-
nyes are female, but can look like mortal men or women of any
race they choose, and are always the most perfect and physically
beautiful of specimens. They cannot, however, pass for
mortals—their huge, feathery wings mark them as denizens of the
Nine Hells.

Erinyes can communicate through telepathy, but tend to prefer
direct speech when luring mortals—they can speak any language.

Combat: Erinyes prefer to use their other powers rather than en-
ter physical combat. If pressed to do so, they can wield any
weapon with proficiency. Other than that, however, the erinyes
has no other form of physical attack.

If it so chooses, an erinyes can cause fear in any creature that
looks upon it. The victim must make a saving throw vs. rod,
staff, or wand or flee in panic for 1-6 rounds. Erinyes all carry a
rope of entanglement that they can use in combat or to bind un-
suspecting victims.

Erinyes possess a very powerful charm person ability. This
charm power can be used against any being within 60 feet the eri-
nyes looks upon, even if the victim does not look back. When so
gazed upon, the victim must immediately make a saving throw
vs. spells as if he were half of his own level. For example, if an eri-
nyes were battling an 8th level paladin and employed its charm
person ability, the paladin would have to make a saving throw vs.
spells as a 4th level warrior. If the victim fails its save, it will be-
come completely loyal to the erinyes and will do anything to pro-
tect and obey the creature, even when that means the death of the
victim or the victim's loved ones. Fortunately for mortal beings,
an erinyes can only have one person so charmed at a time. The ef-
fects of the charm last until the erinyes releases the victim.

In addition to those available to all baatezu, an erinyes can use
any of the following spell-like powers, one at a time, once per
round, at will:

detect invisibility
invisibility
locate object
polymorph self
produce flame

 

 

 

 

 

 

It can attempt to gate in the following: 1-8 spinagons (50%
chance, once per day) or 1-4 barbazu (35% chance, once per day).

Habitat/Society: Erinyes are solitary baatezu, rarely seen in
groups of any kind. They are cunning and evil, securing their po-
sition amongst the baatezu as tempters of mortals. Even though
the erinyes are lesser baatezu, they have a special station in the
Nine Hells. As tempters, they report directly to the Dark Eight
and are outside the normal chain of command.

There are a total of only 500 erinyes in the Nine Hells at any
one time. Lesser baatezu are promoted to erinyes if the number
drops below this.

As tempters, the erinyes have a special power that none of the
other baatezu—even the great pit fiends—have: the ability to
pass into the Prime Material plane for short periods of time. They
do this to attempt to trick and lure mortals back to the Nine Hells
with them. They cannot bring anyone or anything with them
when they pass into the Prime Material plane, and they can only
bring one person back with them when they pass back into the
Nine Hells. They cannot bring back inorganic matter, so victims
will arrive in the Nine Hells without possessions.

Once on the Prime Material plane, the erinyes will seek out a
mortal to lure back to the Nine Hells. Using its charm person
power and its ability to assume a comely male or female form, the
erinyes will try to seduce the mortal. This done, it can transport
the mortal and itself back to the Nine Hells. Mortals so trapped
are doomed to die in the inhuman plains of the Nine Hells unless
their own magical strengths can save them. When a mortal dies
this way, he will become a lemure and be doomed to serve forever
as a soldier of the Nine Hells. It is because of this power to tempt
and doom mortals that the erinyes are respected by all baatezu.

Ecology: Unlike the rest of baatezudom, the erinyes often refuse
promotion from their station. Many do not wish to give up the
special status afforded them in order to return to the normal
ranks of the Nine Hells.
Baatezu, Lesser—Hamatula

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: The Nine Hells
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil
NO. APPEARING: 1 or 3-12
ARMOR CLASS: 1
MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 7

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-8/2-8/3-12
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Fear, hug
SPECIAL DEFENSES: +1 or better weapons to hit
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 30%

SIZE: M (7’ tall)
MORALE: Fearless (19-20)
XP VALUE: 23,000

Hamatula are solitary patrollers of the third and fourth layers of
the Nine Hells. They are large humanoids, covered from head to
toe with large, sharp barbs, right down to their long, meaty tails.
Each creature has unusually long and sharp claws on its hands,
even for a baatezu. Hamatula have keen, alert eyes that always
shift and dart about, giving the creatures a nervous look.

Combat:Hamatula are guardians and patrol troops. They are ex-
cellent guardians and are never surprised.

Hamatula rarely—if ever—use weapons in combat, preferring
to attack with their natural weapons. Their powerful raking
claws strike for 2-8 points of damage per successful attack, fol-
lowed by a powerful bite for 3-12 points of damage per hit. If a
hamatula hits in combat with both of its claw attacks, it has the
option of pulling its victim in to a hug, impaling him on the many
cruel barbs on its body. The damage is 2-8 points with no attack
roll required. The victim is now pinned into the hug and will take
2-8 points of damage per round until released. The hamatula will
release its victim if it takes 15 or more points of damage in a single
round (releasing at the end of the round). A victim who has a 16
or greater strength may tear free, provided he makes a successful
strength check.

In addition to those available to all baatezu, hamatula can per-
form any of the following spell-like powers one at a time, once
per round, at will:

e affect normal fires
e hold person

* produce flame

e pyrotechnics

They can also attempt to gate in the following: 2-12 abishai
(50% chance, once per day) or 1-4 hamatula (35% chance, once
per day).

Hamatula radiate fear upon striking an opponent for the first
time. The defender must make a saving throw vs. rod, staff or
wand or flee in panic for 1-6 rounds.

MC8

Habitat/Society: Hamatula patrol the third and fourth layers of
the Nine Hells in search of intruders. They pursue their duties
with great zeal, knowing that promotion and increased status
hinges on diligence and success. Unauthorized creatures are im-
mediately cast into one of the many cells to be tormented.

Among the baatezu, the hamatula are relatively solitary. They
only travel in groups when commanded to do so by a more pow-
erful baatezu. In these rare instances, they may be deployed ina
small group to investigate a purported intrusion into the middle
layers of the Nine Hells.

On Phlegethos, the fourth layer of the Nine Hells, the pit fiend
Gazra lives in a crystal castle. He is the overseer of the first four
layers of the Hells and as such carries great authority there. His
primary army and guards are composed of hamatula—Gazra
maintains an army of 5,000 of the creatures. He is also guarded at
all times by 20 more of them with maximum hit points. It is
known by the vile hamatula that loyal service to their pit fiend
lord is the fastest way to obtain increased status.

Ecology:Unlike other baatezu, hamatula are unable to pass from
layer to layer on the Nine Hells or to other lower planes. Sages
speculate that this is to ensure that the creatures do not wander
away from their appointed duties.

Hamatula are doubly unique among the baatezu because only
they produce any sort of useful by-product amongst the inhabit-
ants of the Nine Hells. The creatures have a gland behind their
ears that produces a powerful hallucinogen. It is “harvested” by
greater baatezu and used to aid the torment and interrogation of
prisoners. A few brave (or wealthy) sages have obtained samples
of this secretion. Though not enough of it has been obtained to
perform any meaningful experiments, it is believed that greater
quantities of this secretion could produce an extremely potent po-
tion of illusion.

 

 

 
Baatezu, Lesser—Osyluth

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: The Nine Hells
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Lawful evil
NO. APPEARING: 2-8

ARMOR CLASS: 3
MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 5

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 4
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4/1-4/1-8/3-12
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Fear, poison
SPECIAL DEFENSES: +1 or better weapons to hit
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 30%

SIZE: L (9 tall)
MORALE: Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 24,000

Osyluths are horrid to behold, even for baatezu. They are bony
and wretched, almost a dried husk of a human form. Their heads
are fearsome human skulls with sickly dried skin stretched tightly
over them. Protruding from their backside is a very large tail,
much like that of a giant scorpion. Osyluths emit a foul odor of
decay and rot.

Osyluths use telepathic means to communicate.

Combat: The osyluths are terrible opponents that will attack
ruthlessly, driven by hatred and rage. They have two claw attacks
that inflict 1-4 points of damage on a successful hit. Their disgust-
ing bite does 1-8 points of damage per hit. Osyluths will also at-
tack with their tail, which does 3-12 points of damage ona hit and
injects a poison into its opponent. This requires a saving throw
vs. poison be made, but the Osyluth poison is so potent that there
isa —3 penalty to the roll. If the save is failed, the victim will lose
1-4 points of Strength for 1-10 rounds.

In addition to those available to all baatezu, osyluths can use
any of the following spell-like powers, once per round, at will:
fly
improved phantasmal force
invisibility
wall of ice

The foul creatures can also generate fear in a 5 foot radius—
defenders must save vs. rod, staff, or wand or flee in panic for 1-6
rounds. They may also attempt to gate in the following: 1-100
nupperibo (50% chance, once per day) or 1-2 osyluths (35%
chance, once per day). Osyluths can see perfectly in total dark-
ness.

Habitat/Society: Osyluths have a special place in the Nine Hells.
They are the only baatezu to have power over other baatezu of
higher station than themselves. They are the “police” of the Nine
Hells, constantly roaming the various layers and observing the
actions of other baatezu, ensuring they act in a proper baatezuish
manner. If they catch any discrepancy in a baatezu, an osyluth
has the power to send it into the Pit of Flame where the offending
baatezu is tormented for 101 days. After the torture the offending

 

 

 

 

 

 

baatezu is returned to its former position. Osyluths have this
power over any other baatezu save for the mighty pit fiends, who
are above the discipline of the osyluths.

Because the osyluths are charged with the discipline of other
baatezu, they are absolutely loyal in every way, never stepping
out of line or doing anything that is against the nature of baatezu.
But with this power comes danger. Any baatezu that has the op-
portunity to destroy an osyluth without being discovered will
likely do so, If caught in this act, however, the offending baatezu
is instantly reduced to marked lemure status. These marked le-
mures are never allowed to advance beyond their station and are
particularly hated by all baatezu.

The Ring of Cantrum: Once per century, 100 osyluths meet
with the Dark Eight to select which gelugons will be advanced to
pit fiend status. The 100 osyluths present at the moot gather in a
ring around the pit fiends and present the information they have
gathered on the more promising gelugons, including things such
as compliance with the nature of the Nine Hells, major cam-
paigns, and any discrepancies the gelugon in question may have
made. All 100 osyluths present have a combined vote of 1 pit
fiend, or 1/9th vote in the ring. The moot is named after the pit
fiend Cantrum, the founder of the Dark Eight.

Ecology: Osyluths spend very little time as such before advancing
among the baatezu. Their evil and obedient nature earns them ad-
vancement very rapidly. Following every Ring of Cantrum, all
1,000 osyluths in existence are advanced to hamatula status. Si-
multaneously, 1,000 new osyluths are formed. Despite this guar-
anteed advancement, there is still great incentive for osyluths to
perform above and beyond even their exacting standards. If an
osyluth has performed with great dedication to its sinister cause,
it will be advanced to an amnizu rather than a hamatula. This
type of accelerated advancement is rare, but serves the pit fiends
well, guarding against complacency in the osyluth ranks.

 
Balaena

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: The river Oceanus
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral good
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 4
MOVEMENT: Sw 18

HIT DICE: a

THACO: 11

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1/2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-10

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Tail slap, shriek
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: G (30' long)
MORALE: Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 5,000

Balaenas serve as the primary mode of transportation on the river
Oceanus and are the equivalent of the lower planes’ hydroloths.
They look very much like large gray whales with bright, intelli-
gent eyes. Balaenas have a friendly demeanor about them and are
often seen conversing with the inhabitants of the upper planes
who visit their watery domain.

Balaena communicate using a form of telepathy.

Combat: Because of their peaceful nature, balaenas prefer to
avoid combat whenever possible. Their considerable speed in wa-
ter helps make retreat a viable option. When pressed, however, a
balaena can attack with a ramming head-butt against targets sub-
merged or on the surface of the water. Head-butt attacks do 1-10
points of damage per hit and are 50% likely to knock the victim
off balance. Because of their size and the amount of room neces-
sary to perform this ramming attack, balaenas can perform but
one attack every two melee rounds.

Balaenas can also perform a tail slap attack against an oppo-
nent in the water with it. Due to the size of the balaenas’ tail, the
tail slap acts as an area effect weapon. Any creature within 10
yards of the tail slap will automatically take 2-12 points of dam-
age, no save allowed, Victims must then make a saving throw vs.
paralyzation or be stunned for 1-6 melee rounds. If air breathers
are stunned in the water, they must make a Constitution check for
each round they are left stunned and unattended in the water.
Failure means they take an additional 1-4 points of damage. A ba-
laena will never willingly leave intelligent creatures helpless in the
water after a tail slap.

Under water, balaenas can emit an extremely loud shrieking
noise. Anyone under water within 100 yards of the balaena must
make a saving throw vs. breath weapon or be deafened for 2-12
days. This shriek is also 30% likely to attract the attention of 1-2
other balaena who will arrive within 1-4 melee rounds. Though
they can make their shrieking noise in any round that they don’t
attack, the roll to attract other balaenas is made only the first time
in any combat situation.

Because of the tough, leathery texture of their skin, balaenas
will only take half damage from any bludgeoning attack. Because
of their acute sense of hearing, balaenas are only surprised on a
roll of ‘1’ when under water.

Balaenas can cast know alignment at will and can communicate
with any intelligent creature with their powerful telepathy. Be-

 

 

 

 

cause of their telepathy, they are 50% likely to be able to tell when
someone is lying to them.

Habitat/Society: Balaenas serve a vital role in the upper planes.
They are the most accessible means of transportation on the river
Oceanus. Oceanus connects the planes of Elysium, Beastlands,
and Olympus (and possibly more) much the same way that Styx
links the lower planes.

There are several ways to attract the attention of balaenas to
request transportation across Oceanus. The first method, devel-
oped by the rugged warriors of Elysium, is a form of ritual. It in-
volves gathering a bushel of grapes from one of the many
vineyards of Elysium. These are mixed with holly leaves, and the
mixture is then burned on the shore of Oceanus. If all is done
properly, there is an 80% chance of summoning a balaena.

The second method for summoning a balaena is more straight-
forward. A wizard must step into the water of Oceanus and cast
any of the monster summoning spells. This method will always
attract the attention of a balaena.

Because the river Oceanus is very large and can be dangerous
to navigate, the balaena are a very well respected species. They
will never aid evil creatures and are unlikely to aid nongood neu-
trals. They will use their know alignment ability before agreeing
to transport anyone along Oceanus. If the people are evil, the ba-
laena will leave. If they are neutrals, the balaena will inquire as to
their mission, using it's ability to sense lies. If the mission is not a
good-aligned cause, the balaena will not help the group.

Regardless of alignment, balaena will always help any intelli-
gent life form that is in danger in the waters of Oceanus. The ba-
laena will gently nudge the creature or person to the shore.

Ecology: Balaena are inoffensive creatures, and because of their
important role, have no natural enemies. However, the denizens
of the lower planes will often travel to the shores of Oceanus in
order to try and trick or force a balaena to carry them to one of
the upper planes. If they are unable, they will often attempt to
brutally slay or capture it.

 

 

 

 
Bariaur

MCs

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Gladsheim
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Flock
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Day

DIET: Herbivores
INTELLIGENCE: High (13-14)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic good
NO. APPEARING: See below
ARMOR CLASS: 6
MOVEMENT: 15

HIT DICE: 7

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-8 or by weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Charge
SPECIAL DEFENSES: +2 on surprise rolls
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 10%

SIZE: L (7' tall)
MORALE: Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 3,000

Bariaurs are very likely a hardy relative of the earthly centaur,
very likely created by the same sylvan being uncounted eons ago.
However, the bariaurs combine the attributes of man and ram
rather than those of man and horse. These outer planar creatures
have the body of a large and powerful ram. They do not, how-
ever, have a ram’s head. Instead, the torso of a muscular man pro-
trudes from the front of the ram body. Their heads are not totally
human either—they have ram-like features, most noticeably the
great horns that curl out of either side of the skull. Bariaurs are of-
ten seen carrying large clubs as weapons.

Combat: Bariaurs are very tough creatures and are skilled com-
batants. The clubs that they carry are extremely effective, each
one holding special significance for the individual wielding it. The
bariaur warrior’s club is a personal icon, often a family or flock
heirloom handed down from one generation to the next. The his-
tory of each weapon is etched in deep sigils upon it. To lose sucha
personal weapon means such humiliation that the offending ba-
riaur generally leaves Gladsheim to wander other planes, never to
return home.

In combat, a bariaur’s club has the speed factor and damage
characteristics of a two-handed sword.

Even weaponless, a bariaur can perform a powerful butting at-
tack with its horns, delivering 1-8 points of damage per successful
strike. This method of attack is often used in nonlethal combat
between pairs of male bariaurs engaged in battles of dominion.

If a bariaur chooses, it can run up to 150% of its movement rate
and deliver a charging attack. The charge will deliver triple nor-
mal horn damage and is 50% likely to knock down an opponent
that is roughly the bariaur’s size. A bariaur must move at least 30
feet to perform a charge.

These ram-creatures are very alert and aware, with uncanny
senses of smell and hearing. Under normal circumstances it is ex-
tremely difficult to surprise a bariaur. They receive a +2 bonus
on their surprise rolls.

 

 

 

 

 

Bariaurs have a slightly enchanted nature about them, a com-
mon attribute for creatures of a sylvan origin. This nature makes
them 10% resistant to magic. Even if the resistance roll fails, ba-
riaurs still receive a +1 bonus to any save vs. spells. They are also
able to move from layer to layer on the plane of Gladsheim at will.

Habitat/Society: As with most beings native to the plane of Glad-
sheim, bariaurs are carefree and wild. They roam from place to
place in accordance with a powerful wanderlust that keeps the en-
tire flock constantly on the move.

A flock of bariaurs will always be led by a single leader who is
generally stronger or considerably more charismatic than the rest
of the males in the flock. A leader's rule is seemingly absolute, but
he is often challenged by younger males who think themselves
ready for leadership. Such challenges, though, are always very
formal and ritualized, never imprudent or reckless—their chaotic
nature is directed outside of the flock, seldom within it. The loss
of a duel of challenge is neither disgraceful nor dishonorable.

There will usually be between 5 and 20 males in a flock and be-
tween 10 and 30 females. A flock will also contain 0-11 young ba-
riaurs. Flocks are very familial and under normal circumstances
would never split up.

Ecology: Bariaurs are herbivores, feeding on berries, nuts, leaves,
and other foods gathered primarily in the forests. They will not
usually travel from one layer of Gladsheim to another, but will do
so if the food supply in an area warrants a move.

Bariaurs find very few natural enemies in Gladsheim, although
they are known to battle the groups of giants found there. Flocks
will even make all-out attacks on giant lairs in an attempt to wipe
out the beasts.
Bebilith

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: ~The Abyss

FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)

TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: =i

MOVEMENT: 9, Wb 18

HIT DICE: 12

THACO: 9

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-8/2-8/2-12

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Armor destruction, poison
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Webs, protection magic, +2 or better

weapons to hit

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 50%

 

SIZE: H (15’ long)
MORALE: Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: 17,000

Also known as “creepers of the Abyss” and “barbed horrors,” be-
biliths are foul arachnids that roam the Abyss, exacting punish-
ment on the tanar’ri there. Bebiliths are cruel, unwavering
harbingers of death and torture, apparently without remorse or
pity for their victims.

They are hideous, like huge, misshapen spiders with cruel faces
and hard, chitinous outer shells. Their two forelegs each end in a
huge, brutal barb and their mouths are filled with great fangs that
drip a foul liquid.

Bebiliths can apparently speak to each other through a kind of
mind contact. They cannot communicate otherwise.

Combat: Bebiliths are truly evil creatures. They will viciously at-
tack anything they see, without mercy. Their primary means of
physical attack is their sharp forelegs that will cause 1-6 points of
damage per hit. In addition, each hit with a foreleg attack may also
ruin any armor nor shield used by the target. For each hit, roll 1d6:
ona 1-2 the shield (if any) may be ruined, and on a 3-6 the armor (if
any) may be ruined. Nonmagical armor or shields will be ruined
40% of the time. Magical armor and shields modify this by —10%
per plus of the magical enchantment. Ruined armor or shields are
no longer considered when figuring the target's armor class. The ar-
mor or shields themselves are so destroyed that they cannot be re-
paired for less than their purchase prices. Magical enchantments
are lost, regardless of repair. If the target wears neither armor nor
shields, foreleg attacks from a bebilith simply do normal damage.

A bebilith can also attack with a horrid bite that causes 1-12
points of damage per hit and injects its victim with a powerful
poison. Anyone so bitten must save vs. poison with a —2 penalty
or die in 1-4 rounds. Also, if a bless spell is not cast on the body
within one turn of death, the corpse will burst into flames and dis-
integrate.

Four times per day, a bebilith can shoot a powerful web like
substance from its spinner. This web covers a total of 8,000 cubic
feet (a 20-foot cube, or any other shape the bebilith desires); when
shot the webs must begin adjacent to the creature and their fur-
thest point may be no more than 60 feet distant. The webs act just
like a web spell except that those cast by a bebilith are permanent.
Also, even if flame is introduced to the strands, they are only
25% likely (per round of flame contact) to burn.

These spiderlike creatures are never surprised and are immune

 

 

 

 

v. ;
44 —=—

to attacks from nonmagical weapons and magical weapons of +2
or less enchantment. They are always surrounded by a protection
from good spell that they can reverse at will.

If a bebilith is sorely pressed in combat (which is unlikely, con-
sidering its powers) it can plane shift to the Astral plane at will. If
it so chooses, the bebilith may attempt to magically pull one op-
ponent into the Astral plane with it—the bebilith need only be in
melee with the opponent. In order for the creature to pull an op-
ponent into the Astral plane, the opponent must fail a saving
throw vs. wand. Of course, if the opponent has the ability to
leave the Astral plane, the bebilith has no power to stop him.

 

Habitat/Society: The purpose of a bebilith is quite clear, but the
motivation behind that purpose seems incomprehensible. Bebi-
liths act as punishers for the tanar’ri of the Abyss. They seem to
select certain groups of the major tanar’ri and exterminate them
completely, in brief but horrible wars of annihilation. How they
select their targets remains unknown. Of equal mystery is what
exactly a tanar’ri—perhaps one of the cruelest and most chaotic
creatures in existence—can do to incur the wrath of these lower
planar assassins.

Although there are certainly creatures roaming the Abyss that
could destroy a bebilith as a matter of course, such an act is con-
sidered out of the question. The bebiliths have developed an un-
canny mystique about them. Among the denizens of the Abyss, it
is taboo to destroy one.

Ecology: That information that has surfaced about the bebilith
has no doubt done so at the cost of many lives—few who see a
“creeper of the Abyss” live to tell the tale. However, it is of inter-
est to some great mages and scholars, and some information has
been pieced together.

Anyone bold enough and of sufficient power to kill a bebilith
and remove its spinneret would hold great wealth. Mages would
pay highly to get their hands on one. Powerful spells and magical
items of binding can be created from a bebilith’s spinner, or so al-
chemists believe.

 

 

 
Bodak

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: The Abyss
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: None
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 5
MOVEMENT: 6

HIT DICE: 9+9
THACO: 11

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: By weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Death gaze
SPECIAL DEFENSES: +1 or better weapons to hit, spell

immunity, immune to poison

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

 

SIZE: M (6' tall)
MORALE: Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 5,500

Bodaks are grim creations who wander the Abyss. They are
formed from hapless mortals who ventured into places too deadly
for them.

Bodaks appear as humanoids with gray, pearly skin. They have
hairless, muscular bodies and are of no apparent gender. Their eyes
are empty and milky-white, deeply set into their long, distorted
features.

Bodaks have no language of their own. They will typically speak
the language common to the tanar'ri and their dark servants. In
general, they will recognize or remember few words of common.

Combat: The bodak’s primary method of attack is their death
gaze. Any person or creature that meets the gaze of a bodak must
save vs. petrification or die. The gaze is effective to 30 feet. If
death occurs in the Abyss, the victim will form into a bodak
within one day.

Only cold iron weapons or +1 or better magical weapons can
hit a bodak. They are immune to charm, hold, sleep, and slow
spells. Bodaks are immune to poison. Bodaks possess powerful
infravision that allows them to see 180 feet.

Unaccustomed to its brightness, bodaks hate the sun. Direct
sunlight will inflict one point of damage per melee round to an un-
shaded bodak. Different attacks harm them as follows:

 

Attack Damage
acid full
cold half
electricity (lightning) none
fire (magical) half
fire (nonmagical) none
gas (poisonous, etc.) half
iron weapon full
magic missile full
poison none
silver weapon none

Bodaks have a faint attachment to their former lives as mor-
tals. This preoccupation will sometimes—although very rarely —
cause the bodak to pause in combat while it considers its actions.
There is a base 5% chance—rolled one time per encounter—that
the creature will see something in an enemy that reminds it of its

 

 

 

 

 

life before it was transformed into the savage, hellish bodak. If
recognition occurs, the bodak will pause and make no attacks for
one melee round. After that, all of its attack rolls will be at a —2
penalty against that one character.

When encountered, a bodak will have a randomly chosen,
nonmagical weapon, most likely a sword or mace. They can
make single attack per melee round with this weapon, but they
rarely bother to use weapons in combat.

Habitat/Society: Bodaks serve no purpose in an already purpose-
less Abyss. They wander the terrain there in abhorrent hatred of
their inhuman endurance granted them during transformation
from dying mortal to bodak. They are hateful and will attack
anything they see, even creatures of obviously greater power.

Ecology: Legends speak of many mortals that have traveled to the
Abyss to fight the foul creatures that inhabit it. Most never re-
turned. However, there are places in the Abyss so loathsome and
secretive that mortals are simply not allowed. A mortal foolish
enough to enter these and lose his life is subjected to a special
doom—his will and mind is captured and he is painfully trans-
formed into a hideous bodak.

Bodaks are only vaguely humanoid in appearance, but will
sometimes have some small feature of the mortal they once were.
This may manifest itself in a nervous twitch, a peculiar combat
style, or anything else that the bodak may have possessed during
its normal lifetime.

Benign bodak: For reasons unknown, occasionally a mortal'’s
mind will survive the transition from man to bodak. When this
happens to a nonevil individual (particularly to good aligned in-
dividuals), a benign bodak is created. This creature has all the
powers and abilities of a bodak, but the mind of the mortal it once
was. Such creatures will usually die quickly in the Abyss and are,
therefore, of little consequence. Note that even though a benign
bodak will retain its memory and consciousness, it will not have
the ability to cast spells if it was able to as a mortal.
Celestial Lammasu

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

: Olympus
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: See below
INTELLIGENCE: Supra-genius (19-20)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Any good
NO. APPEARING: 1
ARMOR CLASS: 3
MOVEMENT: 15, Fl 26 (C)
HIT DICE: 20 (144 hp)
THACO: 5
NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-12/2-12
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Dive attack, spell use
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Spell use, regeneration, +3 or better

weapons to hit

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 70%
SIZE: L (12' long)
MORALE: Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: 108,500

Celestial lammasu are close relatives of the lammasu native to
the Prime Material plane. These, however, make their homes
among the wilderlands of Olympus. Celestial lammasu are
sometimes also known as the “lions of the Mount,” referring to
Mount Olympus, in whose shadow they so often are found.

As might be expected, a celestial lammasu has the body of a
large, powerful lion. Extending from its back are great wings with
long, beautiful feathers. Its head has the face of a human with
keen, intelligent eyes and a long, flowing mane. Each individual
has a very majestic appearance, projecting its power and belief in
ultimate goodness.

Celestial lammasu pride themselves on the number of languages
they speak—they will use their tongues ability if necessary.

Combat: Celestial lammasu are creatures of tremendous power
and prowess in battle. They will readily enter any combat where
creatures of good alignment are being threatened by evil. At
times, the Lions of the Mount will even come to the aid of nonevil
neutrals warring against evil.

The celestial lammasu’s physical attack consists of two huge,
raking paws that inflict 2-12 points of damage per hit. Due to the
nature of the celestial lammasu, their claw attacks can damage
creatures normally only hit by magical weapons. A celestial lam-
masu can also—when flying—dive down on its opponent with
two claw attacks gaining +2 on its attack roll and inflicting dou-
ble damage (4-24 per claw).

These outer planer denizens also have considerable spell
power. They may cast priest spells as if they were 15th-level
priests with major access to all spheres. In addition, they have the
spell casting ability of a 12th-level wizard. They need not main-
tain spell lists as does a mortal wizard. Instead, they request their
wizard spells daily from any school except necromantic.

In addition to their spell casting abilities, celestial lammasu
have the following spell-like powers that can be used once per me-
lee round, one at a time, at 20th level effect:

cure light wounds

cure serious wounds

dispel evil

dispel magic, 7 times per day
holy word, 3 times per day

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

* plane shift

* protection from evil, triple normal strength, extends around
all good creatures within sight of the celestial lammasu

® teleport without error

* tongues, always active

* wish, 1 time per day, only in times of dire need

Celestial lammasu are immune to damage from nonmagical
weapons and magical weapons of +3 or lesser enchantment.
They naturally regenerate 4 hit points per melee round.

Habitat/Society: Celestial lammasu dwell in the layers of Oly-
mpus from which they wage constant war on evil throughout the
outer and inner planes. They take special interest in lammasu on
the Prime Material plane—the celestial lammasu provide guid-
ance and occasional support to their mortal cousins. There are 36
celestial lammasu known to exist, each with its own true name.

Once every 10 years, one of the celestial lammasus will attenda
special meeting, called a Whitemoon, with certain lammasu of
the Prime Material plane. In attendance are the leaders of all the
lammasu prides for hundreds of miles around. The leaders discuss
their efforts against evil with each other and with the celestial
lammasu. During the night of this Whitemoon, the lammasu tem-
ple glows a brilliant white that can be seen for many miles—it be-
comes a scintillating focus of goodness. Any evil creature that
comes within one mile of the temple is destroyed outright and any
nonevil neutral that approaches within one mile of the temple is
put magically to sleep for the duration of the night.

One important note is that celestial lammasu do not directly
serve a deity or power like the aasimons do. Although their
actions serve the interests of the powers of good alignment, they
are concerned only with their own personal wars on evil.

Ecology: Celestial lammasu are above and outside the normal eco-
logical cycle. They have absolutely no natural predatorial enemies.
Too, they never feed on other life forms for sustenance; rather they
draw nutrients directly from the goodness of the upper planes.

 

 
Dragon, Adamantite

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: _—_ Twin Paradises
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Genius (17-18)
TREASURE: Special
ALIGNMENT: Neutral good
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: -10
MOVEMENT: 15, Fl 42 (C)
HIT DICE: 21 (base)
THACO: 5 (at 21 HD)
NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 + special
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-12/1-12/6-48 (6d8)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: +1 or better weapons to hit
MAGIC RESISTANCE: See below
SIZE: G (54' base)
MORALE: Fearless (19-20)
XP VALUE: See below

Adamantite dragons are perhaps the mightiest of dragonkind.
They are the epitome of good, sacrificing whatever is necessary
for the common good of intelligent creatures everywhere.

These other-planar creatures are strange among dragonkind,
since they are born with their shining coats of adamantite fully
developed (explaining their very low armor class even when
hatchlings). This mighty coat is a shining silver color that reflects
light in brilliant, scintillating beams and rainbows—refreshing to
those who can bask in its goodness, painful to those who hide in
the shadows of evil.

Adamantite dragons speak their own tongue and the language
of all good dragons. By their juvenile years (age category 4), they
will speak common. By the time they are adults (age category 6),
they are 50% likely to speak any language of dragonkind.

Combat: Due to the adamantite dragons’ strong taste for physical
battle, they may use the extra attack forms of dragons (wing buf-
fet, foot stomp, etc) one age category earlier than other dragons.
Breath weapon/special abilities: An adamantite dragon has two
breath weapons, one of which can only be used at certain times.
The common form of breath weapon is a cone of flame 110’ long,
10’ wide at the dragon's mouth, and 45’ wide at the end. This is a
magical flame and will ignite even nonflammable materials.
The adamantite dragon’s second breath weapon projects an
area of time stop. It has the same dimensions as the cone of flame.
Anyone caught in the area must save vs. spells or be affected as if
by a time stop spell cast at 20th level of magic use. This breath

 

 

 

 

 

weapon may only be used on the dragon's home plane (Twin Par-
adises), when the dragons are defending the plane, and even then
only one time per day.

Adamantite dragons may use these spell-like abilities:

* polymorph self, 3 times per day, permanent, may revert to
dragon form without restriction

® magic missile, (adults and older), five missiles per round

* blink, (mature adults and older)

Due to their extra-planar nature, all adamantite dragons are
immune to nonmagical weapons.

Habitat/Society: The adamantite dragons are the self-appointed
guardians of the Twin Paradises. These great creatures are ex-
tremely powerful and will come to the aid of any intelligent crea-
ture. It should be noted, however, that they are unconcerned with
law or chaos, but only the protection of sentient lifeforms.

Ecology: Adamantite dragons have little place in the ecosystem of
the Twin Paradises. They can, however, be avaricious hunters
with huge appetites. Adamantite dragons have no moral objec-
tion to hunting unintelligent lifeforms for food.

Age Body Lgt. Tail Lgt. AC Breath Spells Wizard/Priest MR _ Treasure XP

Weapon Type Value
1 7-19 6-16 -10 4di2+1 Nil Nil Nil 19,000
2 19-31 16-28 -10 6d12+2 Nil Nil Nil 21,000
3 31-43 28-38

      

-10 8d12+3 1

 

  
 

16d12 +7

20d12 +9

~ 2222/22

222222/2222 65 %

  
  
 
  
 

  
    
 

B,C
93-106 84-95 -10 18d12+8 22222/222 60%  B,C,.LTx2 58,000
106-120 95-108 -10 B,C,LT x3

70,000
Einheriar

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: — Upper planes
FREQUENCY: Common
ORGANIZATION: Troupe or army
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: None

INTELLIGENCE: Average to high (8-14)
TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Varies (same as plane encountered in)
NO. APPEARING: 10d10

ARMOR CLASS: Varies according to type and magic
MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: Varies by level
THACO: Varies by class and level
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: By weapon type
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 5%

SIZE: M (6' tall average)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)

XP VALUE: Varies by type

Strictly speaking, the term einheriar is the name given to the dead
of Asgard, the first layer of Gladsheim. Over time, however, the
term einheriar has come to refer to a variety of humanoid spirits
that are employed by the powers of the upper planes as servants,
warriors, patrols, or guards. Simply put, einheriar are the spirits
of good beings whose specialties are being put to use, unchanged,
on the upper planes.

Einheriar appear as wispy, humanoid warriors with equally
wispy armor and weapons. Each individual resembles the being
he was in life—the majority of einheriar were humans before
death. Einheriar are most frequently seen marching in military
formations.

Combat: When encountered, einheriar will be in large groups, or-
ganized loosely into a single combat unit. The individuals within
that unit will each have a class and level akin to that they held in
life. Roll twice for each individual encountered to determine
these.

Class** Level”

1-50 Fighter 1-50 4
51-55 Ranger 51-75 5
56-60 Paladin 76-88 6
61-70 Mage 89-94 7
71-75 Specialist Wizard 95-97 8
76-85 Priest 98 9
86-90 Thief 99 10
91-00 Bard 00 11-16

* divide level by 2 or 3 for multi-class
** if the alignment of the plane precludes a class, roll again

 

 

 

 

 

Einheriar have the maximum number of hit points per hit die.
Compute their THACOs normally for characters of their class and
level. Spell casters will have their complement of spells. Einheriar
do not retain their weapon specialties.

Einheriar will always be outfitted with the absolute best in non-
magical arms and armor for their class. This is also dependent
upon the deity or power the einheriar are serving. For instance,
einheriar in service to the Great Spirit of the American Indian my-
thology would not be wearing plate mail and carrying two-
handed swords.

There is a 3% chance per level that these spirit legions will have
magical items of a nonspecialty nature (i.e. sword +1, chain mail
+2, magical bracers, etc.). Einheriar will never be carrying spe-
cialty items such as armor of etherealness or a sword +1, flame-
tongue,

Habitat/Society: Einheriar are a common element among the
myriad servants of the powers of good. They are a fighting arm of
the gods and will enforce their beliefs willingly and adamantly.

It is unclear how the einheriar fit into the celestial scheme with
respect to the aasimon (q.v.), but they do seem to act indepen-
dently of these greater beings.

Einheriar do not really form into any kind of hierarchy. In the
most general terms, the higher level beings are normally reserved
for more difficult tasks.

Ecology: Because einheriar are basically spirits, they have no real
ecology.

 

 
Gehreleth

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

) Farastu Kelubar Shator
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Tarterus Tarterus Tarterus
FREQUENCY: Very rare Very rare Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary Solitary Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any Any
DIET: Carnivore Carnivore Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10) Very (11-12) Genius (17-18)
TREASURE: Nil Nil Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil Chaotic evil Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1 1 1
ARMOR CLASS: = 2 “a
MOVEMENT: 15, Fl 30 (C) 12, Fl 24 (C) 9, Fl 18 (C)
HIT DICE: 11 13 15
THACO: 9 7 5
NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 3 3
ee DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-7/2-7/3-12 +7 2-8/2-8/4-16 or weapon +8 2-9/2-9/5-20 or weapon +9
(strength bonus) (strength bonus) (strength bonus)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Battle frenzy, adhesive Stench, acidic slime Magical weapons
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Adhesive, +1 or better +2 or better weapons to hit Immune to nonmagical attacks,
weapons to hit +3 or better weapons to hit,
+2 bonus on surprise rolls
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 50% 50% 50%
SIZE: M (7’ tall) M (67/2' tall) M (6! tall)
MORALE: Champion (15-16) Champion (15-16) Fanatic (17-18)
XP VALUE: 28,000 33,500 40,000

 

Farastu

 

 

 

 

 

Gehreleths are the foul inhabitants of Tarterus, part of the killing
grounds in the eternal Blood War. In appearance, Gehreleths are
disgusting and unsightly.

Gehreleths speak a gutteral language of their own, but will use
their tongues ability to communicate with others.

The farastu are tall, slender humanoids with long arms and
heads. Their effective strength is 19 (+7 damage adjustment),
and their weight is about 420 pounds. They are the commoners of
Tarterus.

Combat: Farastu are wicked things that will attack any nongehre-
leth they encounter. They will often fight to the death, ignoring
morale rolls.

Although the vile farastu have several spell-like and special
abilities, they prefer to enter combat with their claws and fangs.
Their powerful claws inflict 2-7 points of damage per successful
hit, the fangs inflict 3-12.

When in combat, a farastu is very likely to go into a battle
frenzy. This will occur after six rounds of combat or when the
creature is reduced to 50% normal hit points. When in a frenzy,
the farastu will receive double his number of normal attacks, and
all are made with a +2 bonus to the attack dice.

Farastu gehreleths secrete a black, tarlike substance that is ex-
tremely adhesive. There is a base 5% chance that anything it hits
or anything that hits it will stick. If the farastu is attacking and
sticks itself to its opponent, the opponent will gain another attack
sequence immediately. If a creature attacking a farastu sticks to
the creature, the farastu will gain a +4 attack roll bonus. The
stuck creature loses initiative. If a weapon is used against the
farastu and it sticks, there is a 25% chance that it will be pulled
from the attacker's grip. It takes one round to pull away a stuck
weapon.

The following spell-like powers can be employed by a farastu
at 11th level of spell use:

* detect good

* detect invisibility

* detect magic

* dispel magic, 2 times per day
Gehreleth

© ESP

* fear

* fog cloud, 3 times per day

* invisibility

* tongues

* weakness, reverse of strength, 3 times per day

Farastu gehreleths are 40% likely to be able to summon 1-2 ad-
ditional farastu once per day.

Farastu are only harmed by +1 or better weapons. Acid or poi-
son have no effect upon them. Farastu gehreleths suffer but half
damage from cold and fire attacks. They are immune to fear of all
types, as well as all illusions and phantasms. Farastu have 120-
foot infravision.

Kelubar

Kelubar are slimy, ebon humanoids, shorter than farastu, being
thickest in the lower torso and limbs. Their hands are very large
and their huge heads are oval, the latitudinal axis being longest.
Their effective strength is 20 (+8 damage adjustment), and they
weigh close to 500 pounds. They are the middle class of Tarterus.

Combat: Kelubar are terrible opponents in combat. They are
know as slime gehreleths because they constantly emit a slimy se-
cretion from their skin that has a debilitating odor. Anyone
within 30 feet of a kelubar in combat must make a saving throw
vs. poison or be incapacitated for 1-10 melee rounds.

Kelubars will attack with their nails and teeth, the former in-
flicting 2-8 points of damage per hit, the latter inflicting 4-16
points. In addition, each attack will inflict 1-6 points of damage
due to the acidic nature of the kelubar's slime. A successful saving,
throw vs. poison will reduce the acidic damage by half.

Kelubars are able to employ all of the spell-like abilities availa-
ble to farastu, plus these, at 13th level of spell use:

ray of enfeeblement, 1 time per day
spider climb

A kelubar is 40% likely to be able to summon 1-2 additional ke-
lubar once per day or is 60% likely to be able to summon 1-2
farastu once per day. The kelubar may only attempt one of these
gates per day.

The kelubars are completely immune to the affects of fire, acid,
cold-based, and poison attacks. Weapons of less than a +2 en-
chantment can do these great monsters no harm. They have infra-
vision extending to 120 feet.

Shator

Shator are 6 feet tall, squat and broad. Their humanoid form ap-
pear draped in shaggy skins. Their huge heads are mostly mouth
with jaws resembling those of a giant bulldog. Their effective
strength is 21 (+9 damage adjustment), and their weight is
around 560 pounds. Shators are the ruling nobility of Tarterus.

Combat: The greatest of the gehreleths, these fearsome creatures
are deadly enemies in combat. Their claw attacks do 2-9 points of
damage per hit and their fearsome bite inflicts 5-20. However,
these monsters have sufficient manual dexterity to wield weapons
in combat. If using a weapon or natural attacks, shators gain full
damage benefits from their great strength.

Because of the powerful nature of the shator, it is possible they
might wield magical weapons in combat. There is a45% chance a
shator has a randomly determined magical weapon.

Shator gehreleths are the most intelligent and cunning of the
gehreleths. When entering combat, they will always choose the
best of their options, often favoring their spell-like abilities over
physical attacks.

Shator gehreleths may use all the spell-like abilities available to

MC8

the farastu, plus the following, at 15th-level of spell use:

beguile, as a rod of beguiling, 1 time per day
cloudkill, 1 time per day

ray of enfeeblement, 3 times per day
stinking cloud, 3 times per day

A shator can always gate either 1-6 farastu or 1-4 kelubar
gehreleths. They are 30% likely to be able to summon 1-2 sha-
tors. They may summon but once per day.

The mighty shator gehreleth is immune to all physical attacks
of a nonmagical nature. Thus nonmagical fire, acid, cold, etc.
will do them no harm. No weapon of less than a +3 enchantment
will affect them. All edged weapons have —1 penalties to hit and
damage against a shator. All mind affecting and illusion type
spells are useless against a shator. Due to extremely sensitive au-
ditory, olfactory, and visual senses, shators have a +2 bonus on
ther surprise rolls. They have 120-foot infravision.

Habitat/Society: There is, without a doubt, no stranger society on
the lower planes than that of the gehreleths. These foul, hateful
beasts will attack anything and everything they meet without re-
serve or mercy. No quarter is given to anything for any reason.
They will not, however, ever attack or endanger another gehre-
leth. Not a single instance of confrontation between two gehre-
leths has ever occurred. Why this peculiar honor amongst such
vile creatures exists is completely unknown.

The gehreleths are most commonly the “summoning stock” of
the lower planes. When a wizard or priest summons a lower pla-
nar being, they are most likely to attract the attention of one of
these creatures. Most would-be summoners would that this were
otherwise. Of all the fiends, gehreleths are the most dangerous—
they will avenge any deeds they are forced to perform, often plot-
ting such revenge for many years. Gehreleths never forget.

It is also not uncommon for gehreleths, particularly the
farastu, to simply not obey a summoner, regardless of the impor-
tance of the mission. They are stubborn and hateful of servitude.

Despite their chaotic nature, the gehreleths live in a caste sys-
tem. In this rigid system, the farastu are the lower class, often act-
ing as servitors on the few occasions when the normally solitary
gehreleths gather in groups. The kelubars are the middle class of
the evil society, and the powerful shators are the upper class and
commanders.

Ecology: Gehreleths do not interact with their environment at all
except to destroy. They produce nothing of value and serve no
purpose to anything around them. It is likely that some evil deity
created the gehreleths simply for the purposes of destruction.

Normally, there are always a 3,333 of each of the three varieties
of gehreleth. New gehreleths are made to replace those that are
destroyed. The single exception to this rule is in times when the
Blood War (q.v.) on the lower planes is at its strongest, when the
gehreleth can increase their numbers to twice or more what is nor-
mally present. Since these evil beasts never take part in the war
and are independent of the baatezu and tanar’ri, it must be as-
sumed that this population increase is for the purposes of protec-
tion from both sides.

The creation and development of a fiend is a foul thing, but
none so foul as the gehreleths. These disgusting beasts are
spawned from the decaying bodies of beings that have traveled to
the lower planes and died there. Some unidentified greater power
gives gruesome life to these monsters, but the details are a mys-
tery.

Freshly transformed cadavers are always made into the lowly
farastu gehreleths. If a greater gehreleth is destroyed, then one of
the already existing lessers will rise in status and take its place,
with the lesser farastu ranks being replenished from new corpses.

 

 
Githyanki

 

 

 

 

 

 

ie CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Astral or prime
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Dictatorship/monarchy
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional to genius (15-18)
TREASURE: Individuals R; Lair H
ALIGNMENT: Any evil
NO. APPEARING: 2-8 (away from lair)
ARMOR CLASS: Per armor
MOVEMENT: 12, 96 on Astral plane
HIT DICE: Per class and level
THACO: Per class and level
NO. OF ATTACKS: Per class and level
DAMAGE/ATTACK: Per weapon type

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Possible spell use, possible magical
weapon

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

 

SIZE: M (6' tall)
MORALE: Average to elite (8-14)
XP VALUE: Per class and level

Githyanki are an ancient race descended from humans. They
dwell upon the Astral plane but will often leave that plane to
make war on other races. They are engaged in a lengthy war with
the githzerai.

Githyanki are strongly humanoid in appearance. They are ap-
proximately of human height but tend to be much more gaunt
and long of limb. They have rough, yellow skin and gleaming
black eyes that instantly betray their inhumanness. Like many de-
mihuman races, their ears have a sharp point and are serrated at
the back. Dress for the githyanki is always an elaborate affair.
Their baroque armor and weapons of war are decorated with
feathers, beads, and precious metals and gems.

Githyanki speak their own tongue, and no others.

Combat: The githyanki have had long years to perfect the art of
war. Their very existence attests to their battle prowess. Each in-
dividual githyanki has a character class and level from which are
derived such things as THACO, armor class, spell use, etc.

Class Level
01-40 Fighter 01-20 3rd
41-55 Mage 21-30 4th
56-80 Fighter/Mage 31-40 5th
81-85 Illusionist 41-60 6th
86-00 Knight 61-80 7th
81-90 8th
91-95 9th
96-98 10th
99-00 11th

The armor for each githyanki varies according to class. Mages
and illusionists have AC 10. Fighters and fighter mages have dif-
fering armor—AC 5 to AC 0 (6-1d6). Knights have AC 0.

Githyanki have hit dice according to their class and level, and
their hit points are rolled normally. Their THACO is determined
per class and level, as well. Fighters, fighter/mages, and knights
may receive more than one attack per round—other githyanki
have one attack per round.

Githyanki knights are evil champions who take up the causes
of the githyankis’ mysterious lich-queen. Githyanki knights are
very powerful and highly revered in their society. Githyanki
knights have all of the powers and abilities of a human paladin ex-

 

Se aa il

ba)
ae
—

 

 

 

 

cept these are turned toward evil (e.g. detect good instead of de-
tect evil, command undead instead of turning undead, etc.).

Githyanki mages, fighter/mages, and illusionists will receive
all the spells available at their level of experience. Spells should be
determined randomly, keeping in mind that they are by nature
creatures of destruction—offensive spells should be favored.

The githyanki soldiers use arms and armor similar to humans,
however these are normally highly decorated and have become
almost religious artifacts. A githyanki would likely show greater
care for his weapons and armor than he would toward his mate.
Half of the githyanki fighters, fighter/mages, or knights that
progress to Sth level receive a magical two-handed sword +1, the
remainder using normal two-handed swords. Githyanki fighters
of 7th level and above are 60% likely to carry a long sword +2.
Knights of 7th level and above will always carry a silver sword—
a two-handed sword +3 that, if used astrally, has a 5% chance
per hit of cutting an opponent's silver cord (see The Astral Plane,
DMG, page 132), but mind barred individuals are immune. A su-
preme leader of a lair will carry a special silver sword that is +5
with all the abilities of a vorpal weapon that also affects mind
barred individuals.

Githyanki will never willingly allow a silver sword to fall into
the hands of a nongithyanki. If a special silver sword should fall
into someone's hands, very powerful raiding parties will be
formed to recover the sword. Failure to recover one of these
highly prized weapons surely means instant death to all the gith-
yanki involved at the hands of their merciless lich-queen.

All githyanki have the natural ability to plane shift at will.
They will rarely travel anywhere besides back and forth from the
Astral plane to the Prime Material plane.

Habitat/Society: History provides some information on the
githyanki—their race is both ancient and reclusive. Sages believe
they once were humans that were captured by mind flayers to
serve as slaves and cattle. The mind flayers treated their human
slaves cruelly and the people harbored a deep resentment toward
the illithids. For centuries these humans increased their hatred but
Githyanki

could not summon the strength necessary to break free. So they
waited for many years, developing their power in secret, waiting
for an opportunity to strike out against their masters. Finally, a
woman of power came forth among them, a deliverer by the
name of Gith. She convinced the people to rise up against their
cruel masters, The struggle was long and vicious, but eventually
the people freed themselves. They had earned their freedom and
become the githyanki, (which, in their tongue, means sons of
Gith).

These astral beings progress through levels exactly as a human
would. However, there has never been a githyanki that has pro-
gressed beyond the 11th level of experience and very few progress
beyond 9th. When a githyanki advances to 9th level, he is tested
by the lich-queen. This grueling test involves survival in one of
lower planes for a number of weeks. Failure quite obviously re-
sults in death. Githyanki that reach 12th level of experience are
immediately drawn out of the Astral plane and into the presence
of the lich-queen where their life force is drawn to feed the raven-
ous hunger of the cruel demi-goddess.

Githyanki dwell in huge castles on the Astral plane. These or-
nately decorated castles are avoided by all other dwellers on the
Astral plane for the githyanki are infamous for being inhospitable
to strangers.

A githyanki stronghold will be ruled by a supreme leader. This
leader will be a fighter/mage of 10th/8th level or 11th/9th level.
The supreme leader is the undisputed overlord of the castle with
the power of life and death over all who dwell there. A typical
leader will be equipped with 2-8 random magical items in addi-
tion to the weapons described above.

All castles have a retinue of 20-80 knights of 9th level that serve
as the supreme leader's elite shock troops. They are fanatically
loyal. There will also be up to 1,000 githyanki of lesser status.

Githyanki, having the ability to plane shift at will, often travel
to the Prime Material plane. These treks across the planes often
lead to the formation of underground lairs used to mount surface
raids, though their hatred is more often directed against mind
flayers. Outside the war with the githzerai, these raids are con-
ducted largely for the perverse pleasure of the kill.

A typical githyanki lair on the Prime Material plane will con-
tain the following:

One supreme leader 11th level fighter or 7th/8th level

fighter/mage

Two captains 8th level fighter and 7th/6th level
fighter/mage

One knight 8th level

Two warlocks mages of 4th-7th level

Three sergeants fighters of 4th-7th level

Two ‘gish’ fighter/mages of 4th/4th level

20-50 lower levels determined randomly using the table

above, of 1st-3rd level

On the Prime Material plane, githyanki have a pact with a
group of red dragons. These proud creatures will act as mounts
and companions to the githyanki. When encountered on the
Prime Material plane and outside their lair, a githyanki group will
typically consist of the following:

MC8

One captain 8th level fighter
One warlock 4th to 7th-level mage
Five lower

githyankis fighters of 1st-3rd level

Such a group will have two red dragons as steeds, transporting
between four and six githyanki per dragon. The dragons will fight
for the safety and well-being of the githyanki but will not directly
risk their lives, fleeing when the battle is turned against them. Just
what the githyanki offer the red dragons in return for these serv-
ices is unknown,

An interesting aspect of githyanki society is the apparent bond
between military leaders and their subordinates. This bond al-
lows a leader to give his men short, almost senseless commands
(to human standards) and actually relay complex and exacting
messages. Although this has no actual affect during the melee
round, it often leads to more effective ambushes and attacks and
allows complex military decisions to be relayed quickly.

Ecology: Githyankis have similar ecology to that of humans.
However, the Astral plane does not offer the same type of envi-
ronments as the Prime Material plane, so their cultural groups are
much different. In a society where farmers and tradesmen are un-
necessary, more unique, specialized groups have evolved.

G"lathk: The g”lathk, (admittedly nearly unpronounceable in
human tongues) are the equivalent of farmers. Due to the barren-
ness of the Astral plane, the githyanki are forced to grow food in
vast, artificial chambers. They rely upon a variety of fungi and
other plants that require no sunlight to grow. The g"lathk are also
experts in aquatic plantlife, sometimes tending gigantic water-
gardens.

Mlar: Not all magic-using githyanki ever attain the power and
self-discipline necessary to become wizards. Some use their magi-
cal talents in the field of architecture and construction. The mlar
are such individuals, focusing their creative energies toward de-
signing and constructing the buildings and structures used in day-
to-day life in githyanki society. The mlar have developed their
jobs into an art form.

Hr’a'cknir: The Astral plane has many strange energies moving
through it. Some of these energies are obvious to the senses, such
as heat and light. Others are not so easily observed. There are
many psychic and strange astral energies that humans generally
are not aware of. Being a psychically aware race, however, the
githyanki cannot only sense these energies, but harness them too.
The hr’a’cknir are the collectors of those energies. They are simi-
lar to the mlar, in that they use innate magical powers to perform
their crafts.

More than humans, githyanki are hunters and predators. They
will typically engage in raiding and plundering seemingly for the
joy they derive from it. It is likely that the long centuries of en-
slavement of their race has caused the githyanki to bully those
weaker than themselves.

Unlike humans, though, the githyanki never war amongst
themselves. The split of the githyanki and the githzerai (q.v.) is
the closest thing the gith races have known to civil war. Githy-
anki never battles githyanki. It is the unwritten rule of gith soci-
ety and is never broken. This, too, may be an effect of the race's
enslavement.

 

 
Githzerai

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN;: Limbo

FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Monarchy/dictatorship
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional to genius (15-18)
TREASURE: Individual P; Lair H x 2
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral

NO. APPEARING: 2-8 (away from lair)
ARMOR CLASS: Variable

MOVEMENT: 12, 96 in Limbo

HIT DICE: Per class and level
THACO: Per class and level

NO. OF ATTACKS: Per class and level
DAMAGE/ATTACK: Per weapon type

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Nil
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 50%

 

SIZE: M (6’tall)
MORALE: Average to steady (8-12)
XP VALUE: Per class and level

Githzerai are the monastic, chaotic neutral counterparts to the
githyanki (q.v.). The two races share a stretch of time in history;
the githzerai are the lesser and more repressed offshoot of the
original people that the warrior Gith helped to escape the slavery
of the mind flayers millennia ago.

Githzerai are very similar in appearance to their githyanki
cousins, although they tend to look much more human. Their
features are for the most part unremarkable, with vaguely noble
countenance. Their skin tone is that of human caucasian flesh.
Githzerai dress simply, wearing functional clothing and favoring
conservative tones.

Combat: The githzerai are unadorned and ruthlessly straightfor-
ward with their combat and magic. Their strong resistance to
magic seems to make up for their generally inferior fighting abil-
ity.

Class Level
(add 3 if thief)
01-55 Fighter 01-10 1st
56-75 Fighter/Mage 11-20 2nd
76-95 Mage 21-30 3rd
96-00 Thief 31-45 4th
46-60 5th
61-75 6th
76-90 7th
91-96 8th
97-00 9th

The armor for each githzerai varies according to class. Mages
have AC 10. Fighters and fighter mages have differing armor—
AC 5 to AC 0 (6—1d6). Thieves have AC 7.

Githzerai have hit dice according to their class and level, and
their hit points are rolled normally. Their THACO is determined
per class and level, as well. Fighters and fighter/mages may re-
ceive more than one attack per round—other githzerai have one
attack per round.

On rare occasions, a githzerai will progress as a thief. These
thieves seem to have some significance to the strange githzerai re-
ligion. Although they are never known to become leaders in any
capacity, these thieves are an exception to the maximum level of
9th, often progressing up to 12th level of experience. Just what
role these thieves play is unknown.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Githzerai fighters of at least 5th level have use of silver swords.
These magical weapons are two-handed swords +3 that, if used
in the Astral plane, have a 5% chance of cutting an opponent's sil-
ver cord upon scoring a hit(see The Astral Plane, DMG, page
132), though mind barred individuals are immune. These weap-
ons are of powerful religious value to the githzerai and they will
never willingly allow them to fall into the hands of outsiders. If
this happens, the githzerai will go to great ends to recover the
weapon.

All githzerai have the innate power to plane shift to any plane.
This is rarely done except to travel back and forth to the Prime
Material plane where the githzerai have several fortresses.

Habitat/Society: The githzerai are originally an offspring of a race
of humans that were freed from slavery under mind flayers by a
great woman warrior named Gith. These men and women did
not, however, choose to follow Gith’s ways after they revolted
against their slavers. Instead, they fell sway to the teachings of a
powerful wizard who proclaimed himself king—and later, god—
of the people. The githzerai then separated themselves from the
githyanki, beginning a great racial war that has endured the long
millennia without diminishing.

Githzerai can progress as fighters, mages, or fighter/mages,
and thieves. They will rarely attain levels above 7th and, in any
case, will never progress beyond 9th. The githzerai, who worship
a powerful and ancient wizard as though he were a god (he is
not), are destroyed before they have enough power to become a
threat to their ruler.

If encountered outside of their lair, githzerai will usually be in
the following numbers:

One supreme leader 9th level fighter or 4th/7th level
fighter/mage

6th level fighter or 4th/4th level
fighter/mage

mages of 3rd-Sth level

fighters of 3rd-5Sth level

One captain

Two warlocks
Three sergeants
Githzerai

Three ‘zerths’ fighter/mages of 3rd/3rd level
20-50 lesser githzerai evenly distributed between the three possi-
ble classes and of Ist-3rd level

A thief, if present (10% chance), will replace one of the lower
level githzerai and will be of 6th-10th level.

The githzerai dwell primarily on the plane of Limbo. They
have mighty fortresses in that plane of chaos and their position
there is very strong. Typically, one of these fortresses contains ap-
proximately 3,000 githzerai led by a single supreme leader. This
leader has absolute control over the githzerai, including the
powers of life and death.

The githzerai hold only a few fortresses on the Prime Material
plane, but these are particularly strong holdings, with walls of
adamantite rising as huge squat towers from dusty plains. Each
houses approximately 500 githzerai, including a supreme leader.

On Limbo, however, the githzerai presence is very strong. Liv-
ing in cities typically of 100,000 or more, the githzerai enjoy total
power over themselves on an otherwise chaotic and unpredicta-
ble plane. One notable example of this is the city Shra’kt'lor. This
large githzerai capital is composed of some 2,000,000 githzerai
living in great power. Shra’kt'lor serves as both a capital and asa
headquarters for all githzerai military matters. The greatest gen-
erals and nobles of the race meet here to plan githzerai strategy
for battling both the githyanki and the mind flayers. There is
likely no force on Limbo that could readily threaten the power of
Shra’kt'lor or its many inhabitants.

One of the prime motivations among the githzerai is their war
with the githyanki. These offshoots of Gith’s original race are ob-
sessed with this war of extermination. They often employ merce-
naries on the Prime Material plane to aid them in battling the
githyanki. The evil, destructive nature of the githyanki makes the
hiring of mercenaries to fight them a relatively simple task.

Legend of the Zerthimon: In githzerai lore there is a central figure
that is revered above all others—Zerthimon. The githyanki be-
lieve him to be a great god that was once a man. According to
githzerai lore, when the original race broke free of the mind flay-
ers, it was Zerthimon that opposed Gith, claiming that she was
hateful and unfit to lead the people.

There ensued a great battle and the people were polarized by
the two powers. Those that chose to support Gith became the
githyanki. Those that supported Zerthimon became the githzerai.

Zerthimon died in the battle, but in his sacrifice he freed the
githzerai from Gith. The githzerai believe that someday Zerthi-
mon, in his new godly form, will return and take the them to a
place on another plane.

Zerths are special among the githzerai, acting as focal points
for the attention of Zerthimon. The githzerai believe that when
Zerthimon returns for them, he will first gather all of the zerths
and lead them to their new paradise. It might be said that the
zerths are the center of githzerai religion. Unfortunately, they are
not free from religious persecution.

The wizard-king (whose name is not known) that rules over the
highly superstitious githzerai would like very much to stamp out
the legend of Zerthimon. The wizard-king believes that this leg-
end challenges his authority, and very likely it does. However, he

MC8

has never been able to rid the githzerai of this legend and he is
now forced to tolerate it.

Rrakkma bands; Although the githzerai are not a bitter or
overly violent race, they still tend to hold a strong enmity and ha-
tred for the race of illithids that originally enslaved the gith race
so many thousands of years ago. By human terms, that may be a
very long time to hold a grudge, but the githzerai see the mind
flayers as the cause of the split of the Gith race and much of the
hardships the githzerai are forced to endure. Thus large rrakkma
(in the githzerai tongue) bands are often formed to hunt mind
flayers. These bands typically consist of 30-60 githzerai warriors
led by the githzerai equivalent of a sergeant. For roughly three
months, these bands will roam the outer and inner planes, search-
ing for groups of illithids and destroying them utterly. The
rrakkma bands are very popular in githzerai society and it is con-
sidered to be an honor to serve in one.

The githzerai fortresses on the Prime Material plane tend to be
very large affairs with great, impenetrable walls. Wherever these
fortresses stand, they destroy the landscape for miles. No plants
or animals live within many miles of the fortresses and the land is
reduced to wasteland around them. It is not known if the effect is
just the land’s reaction to the “other-planar” stuff of which the
castles are constructed, or if githzerai mages magically produce
the effect in order to keep material beings away from these for-
tresses.

The most likely purpose of these fortresses on the Prime Mate-
rial plane is to keep tabs on the githyanki. The githzerai, not be-
ing a particularly war-mongering or violent race, have no desire
to conquer the Prime Material plane like the githyanki do. How-
ever, the githzerai realize that if their enemies have a strong hold
on the Prime Material plane, they will become more powerful
and thus will hold power over them. The githzerai carefully mon-
itor the progress on the githyanki and lead coordinated, focused
strikes against strongpoints of the githyanki, thus hampering
their ability to expand and grow in the Prime Material plane.

During these attacks, the githzerai will not intentionally attack
the natural denizens of the Prime Material plane (humans, demi-
humans, humanoids, etc.), but they will never sacrifice a well-
planned attack on the githyanki just to preserve life. With the
githzerai, the ends will always justify the means.

Like the githyanki, the githzerai really have no part in the
Blood War (q.v.) of the fiends. They seldom venture to the lower
planes, and only then for matters of absolute importance. The
githzerai find the bloodthirsty, destructive nature of the fiends to
be distasteful, so they will typically not deal with those creatures
for any reason. They coexist with the slaadi, and githzerai are ru-
mored to have mental powers beyond those described here.

Ecology: For as long as men have known of the ability to travel
the planes, they have wondered at the natural power of the
githzerai to wander from plane to plane at will. Although man
and githzerai are not natural enemies, battles are frequently
fought between the two races, due in part to some humans’ desire
to capture a live githzerai for study. To date, no such creature has
been secured.

 

 
Hordling

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Hades or prime
FREQUENCY: Common (Hades) or
very rare (prime)
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Semi-to average (2-10)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: 1-6 (Hades) or 1 (prime)
ARMOR CLASS: 3,:2,1,,0r0
MOVEMENT: 6, 9, 12, or 15 (D with wings)
HIT DICE: 6+3, 7+2, 8+1, or 9
THACO: 6+3 HD: 15
7+2 and 8+1 HD: 13
9 HD: 11

NO. OF ATTACKS:

By type of hordling

 

 

 

DAMAGE/ATTACK: See attack table
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See special attack table
SPECIAL DEFENSES: __ See special defense table
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 0%, 5%, 15%, or 30%
SIZE: S, M, or L

MORALE: Unsteady (5-7)

XP VALUE: Varies per hordling

Hordlings are the uncounted hordes of Hades. They form the ma-
jority of the population of that plane.

Hordlings are varied in size and appearance—no two hordlings
look exactly alike. Some are large, some are small. Some are hu-
manoid, some are amorphous. Some have wings, some do not.
Some have tentacles, some do not. In short, there are as many dif-
ferent types of hordling as there are hordlings.

Hordlings have no standard means of communication.

Combat: Each hordling’s characteristics are determined ran-
domly. Note that these tables present all the characteristics that
pertain to combat and flight. Other tables that give the appear-
ance of the individual hordling are presented in Ecology.

Armor class, movement rate, hit dice, magic resistance, and
size are determined by rolling a d4 separately for each character-
istic on this table.

Roll AC MV HD MR SZ
1 3 6 6+3 0 S
2 2 9 7+2 5% M
3 1 12 8+1 15% L
4 0 15 9 30% H

Each of the physical attributes listed below require a dé roll for
each. Some of these attributes convey a combat attack, and are
labeled with a parenthetical lower case letter, further explained in
the Combat section.

Arms 1(1), 2(2-5), 4(6) Legs 2(1-4), 3(5), 4(6)

1 multi-jointed 1 long, thin

2 telescoping * 2 short, bowed
3. short, thick 3. short, massive
4 trunk-like 4 springing “

5 long, thin 5 hopping **

6 tentacle 6 telescoping ***
* reach is doubled * can spring 20’

** can jump 10’ in any direction
*** can add 50% to normal
height

 

 

 

 

Hands/extremities Feet/extremities
1 large, thick-fingered (g) 1 prehensile toes, long
2 clawed (h) 2 full hoofed (m)
3 taloned (i) 3 splayed hoofed (n)
4 pincered (j) 4 clawed (o)
5 barbed (k) 5 suckered
6 knobbed (1) 6 full webbed *
* swims at normal speed
Back Tail
1 humped 1 long, prehensile
2 hunched 2. short
3 knob-maned 3 long
4 bristle-maned 4 long, clubbed (j)
5 fan-winged * 5 long, barbed (k)
6 bat-winged ** 6 none

* flies 18—maximum of 9 on ground
** flies 12—maximum of 12 on ground

Strength Mouth [large (1-4), huge (5,6)|
1 17(+1/ +1) 1 protruding tusks (a)

2 18(+1/ +2) 2 many small fangs (b)

3 18/50 (+1/ +3) 3 long canines (c)

4 18/75 (+2/+3) 4 small tusks (d)

5 18/00 (+3/ +6) 5 crushing teeth (e)

6 19(+3/+7) 6 saw-toothed (f)

Having created a hordling, its combat proficiency is simple to
calculate. First, its attacks must be tabulated, determined by the
various mouth, arm, tail, and leg attributes determined above.

Attack Table—Damage
tusks: large 2-8; huge 2-12
fangs: small 2-8; large 2-8
long canines: large 1-6; huge 1-8
small tusks: large 1-8; huge 1-10
crushing teeth: large 3-6; huge 4-7
saw-toothed: large 1-3 (1-4 per round thereafter); huge 1-4 (1-6
per round thereafter)

"toa ow
Hordling

BS 7

o

blow: one hit 1-4 + strength; two hits strangle for 2-8 +
strength

claw: 2-5

talon: 1-6

pincer: 1-4

barb: 1 per round and stuck fast (strength check to escape)
knob or club tail: 1-3

full hoof: 1-2

splayed hoof: 1-3

hind claw: 1-4

For example, a hordling found to have two claws, crushing

teeth, and a strength of 18/00 would do 2-5/2-5/3-6 damage plus
6 points per hit for the strength bonus.

It is possible that a hordling will also have special attacks or de-

fenses. One is 10% likely to have a special attack and 20% likely

to

have a special defense. Determine the exact nature of these

abilities below.

mwWh

Special Attacks Table
The hordling’s breath is the equivalent of a small stinking
cloud verses one opponent in a 3-foot range.
The hordling’s gaze is equivalent to a ray of enfeeblement spell
against one opponent in a 5-foot range.
The hordling’s legs have a tripping ability equivalent to a trip
spell against one opponent in melee.
The hordling’s sound emanation is equivalent to a fumble
spell against one opponent in a 5-foot range.
The hordling can do double attacks for 1 round once per turn.
The hordling has acidic spittle missiles with a 10-foot range, in-
flicting 2-8 points of damage, and can fire them once per turn

Special Defenses Table
The hordling can only be harmed by weapons of +2 better
magical enchantment.
The hordling is immune to fire and acid attacks.
The hordling is immune to cold, gas, and poison attacks.
The hordling is immune to electrical and magic missile at-
tacks.
The hordling is unaffected by illusions and mental attacks
(charm, etc.).

MC8

 

Bringer of Doom: So distant in the past is the Age of Doom
that it cannot even be conceived of by mortals. This was a time
of great lamenting, for the society of the beings that lived in
that age was destroyed in the twinkling of an eye. The power-
ful magics and sciences became too great for those beings and
their passions overcame their senses. In a great wave of power,
the race destroyed itself, leaving behind no remnants save one.

Perhaps it would have been better that they left nothing be-
hind, for the artifact known as the bringer of doom somehow
survived that great holocaust. The bringer of doom is a small
box with a strange, circular red gem set upon its top. If the gem
is touched and depressed, the box itself will explode in a blind-
ing flash of power and destruction. So great is the force of the
blast that everything within 100 feet of the item (including the
item’s user and the item itself) are destroyed utterly.

The explosion opens a temporary, one-way rift to Hades
from which 100-1,000 hordlings will pour forth and bring de-
struction down upon everything they encounter. There is a
10% chance that some other, greater fiend will come through
the rift, as well.

The bringer of doom always reforms and manages to be dis-
covered some time later.

 

 

 

Ecology: Hordlings have very little impact on their environment,
since Hades has no ecology. They will typically devour whatever
they destroy—which is usually other hordlings.

The fact that there is no readily available food supply on the
lower planes makes the endless, relatively weak hordlings an
ideal feeding stock for more powerful beings. Creatures such as
the larva have some significance and will usually not be eaten by
other fiends, but the hordlings are considered to be sufficiently
worthless to be eaten.

The physical appearance of a hordling may be important for
play, but is unnecessary for combat. The full appearance of a hor-
dling can be generated here.

 

6 The hordling can regenerate 2-5 hit points per turn.

Those hordlings with hands or prehensile tentacles can use
weapons.

Hordlings can use the following spell-like abilities, one at a
time, one per round:

® improved invisibility
® infravision
Treat hordlings as having 5 hit dice for purposes of clerical

turning of undead.

Habitat/Society: Hordlings are the vast majority of the popula-
tion of Hades. There are an infinite number of hordlings on the in-
finite layers of Hades. They are without purpose or organization.

Hordlings are petty and vile. They roam Hades, attacking

those weaker than themselves. They will tend to serve under
strong leaders when possible, but very few beings will maintain a
group of hordlings for very long. They tend to be unruly and un-
trustworthy. They are characteristically chaotic on an already
chaotic plane.

Occasionally, demented or evil mages will attempt to summon

hordlings to do their bidding. Normal means of summoning will
always produce but a single hordling. The only known way to
summon more than a single hordling into the Prime Material
plane is the Bringer of Doom, a strange device created by arcane
magic during the Age of Doom, a time so far in the past peculiar
to Hades.

Color Head Head adornment

1 black-brown 1 wedge-shaped 1 bald

2 russet-red 2 conical 2 mane &

3 orange-yellow 3 discoid 3 frills

4 olive-green 4 spherical 4 lumps

5 blue-purple 5 cubical 5 spikes (2-8)

6 gray-white 6 ovoid 6 horns (1-4)
Mouth-large (1-4),

Neck Nose Huge (5,6)

1 thick 1 wide, protruding 1 out-thrust tusks (a)

2 thin 2 slits only 2 many small fangs
(b)

3 long 3 hanging snout 3 long canines (c)

4 thrust forward 4 long, pointed 4 tusks (d)

5 snaky 5 large, many warts 5 crushing teeth (e)

6 none apparent 6 beaked 6 saw-toothed (f)

Ears 2(1-4) or 4(5,6)
1 large, pointed

2 small, pointed

3 drooping

4 large, fanlike

5 huge, humanoid
6 none

Overall visage

1 gibbering, drooling
2 glaring, menacing
3 twitching, crawling
4 wrinkled, seamed
5 hanging, flaccid

6 rotting, tattered

 
Larva

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Lower planes
FREQUENCY: Common
ORGANIZATION: Masses
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Unknown
INTELLIGENCE: Semi- (2-4)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Any evil
NO. APPEARING: 10-100
ARMOR CLASS: 7
MOVEMENT: 3

HIT DICE: =i
THACO: 20

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-5
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Wounding, disease
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Nil

MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

 

 

SIZE: M (5' long)
MORALE: Unreliable (2-4)
XP VALUE: 35

Larvae are the evil dead from the Prime Material plane who led
especially selfish lives. They are doomed to spend their wretched
existences serving the whims of evil on the lower planes.

Horrifying in appearance, larvae appear as giant worms ap-
proximately five feet long. They are sickly yellow in color and are
covered with a thick, viscous, foul-smelling fluid. Instead of a
worm’s head, they have distorted humanoid faces resembling the
mortals they were in life.

Larvae communicate with one another through basic body lan-
guage that cannot be interpreted by anyone else.

Combat: Larvae have essentially no will of their own, simply lay-
ing in giant, quivering masses on the grounds of Hades. However,
when so commanded by something of greater power than their
own—which is just about anything ambulatory in Hades—larva
will attack en masse.

These foul creatures will inflict a painful bite for 2-5 points of
damage that will bleed for an additional point of damage per
round until bound. In addition, anyone bitten by a larva must
make a saving throw vs. poison or contract a rotting disease.
Those contracting the disease will develop a painful skin rot. Af-
ter three weeks, they will lose 4 hit points a day unless they lie ab-
solutely still. After one month, they will die. A cure disease spell
will destroy the disease.

Habitat/Society: Larvae are herded by night hags who use them
as bargaining chips in Hades. The larvae are sought after by most
of the lower planar powers because they are used to form quasits
and imps. Powerful liches also seek larvae because they feed off
the creatures’ energies to maintain their immortal, undead status.

The night hags will use the larvae in the huge land-wars that oc-
cur on the plane of Hades (although only immortal creatures like
the fiends can understand why battles for land occur on a plane
that is infinite in size). The night hags will trade larvae to the
lower planar denizens to keep them from entering their territory.
The hags will also trade larvae to the liches for destroying those

& creatures that refuse to trade. It is a complex and wholly evil bar-

 

 

 

 

 

tering system that is perpetuated by the growing numbers of
lower planar inhabitants.

If any rumors exist of the mighty fortress/palace of Malsheem
on Hell's ninth plane, they are few and far between. There is one
particular future event that is spoken of between the most power-
ful of baatezu: the bringing. The Dark Eight plot to enact The
Bringing to ensure the total destruction of their hated enemies,
the tanar'ri. The rituals used to invoke The Bringing will be long
and dangerous (although whatever being could put a mighty pit
fiend in danger can only be guessed at) and titanic magical ener-
gies will be released. To fuel the great spell, the actual life essence
of a thousand times a thousand larvae must be utterly destroyed.
Although it is uncertain whether or not this is merely rumor, it is
known that the baatezu have been acquiring larvae from the
night hags at an unusually rapid pace.

Ecology: Larvae are actually very useful to the “ecology” of the
lower planes. They are the sole means for creating imps and
quasits. Since the imps and quasits might later advance to become
greater fiends, it can be said that larvae are the foundation of the
population of the lower planes.

There is no real criteria for selecting larvae to be made into
greater creatures. Since all larvae are considered to be equally
lowly, they are just randomly selected when the need for other
types of creatures arises. How the larvae are transformed into
greater creatures depends wholly on the race of fiends doing the
transformation. The baatezu, for example, will cast the larvae
into one of the many pools of flame found on their plane where
the larvae must endure the suffering for 11 days. Once their time
in the pool is complete, they emerge as the new creature, perhaps
a little crueler than they were before they entered. Other fiends
have different ways to advance larvae.
Maelephant

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Lower planes

FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore

INTELLIGENCE: High (13-14)

TREASURE: Nil (see below)

ALIGNMENT: Lawful neutral (evil)

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 0

MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 8+2

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6/1-6/2-12

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Crush, charge, cause memory loss

SPECIAL DEFENSES: __ Regeneration, +1 or better weapons
to hit

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 30%

SIZE: L (9' tall)

MORALE: Fearless (19-20)

XP VALUE: 21,500

Maelephants are frightening beasts that act as guardians in the
lower planes. They are large, roughly bipedal creatures with
huge, pachyderm heads. Their trunks end in a vicious barb used
in combat. The maelephant's appearance is at once terrifying and
fascinating.

Maelephants speak their own language, and many know the

common tongue, as well.
Combat: Maelephants attack with their powerful claws and their
wicked trunk-spike. The claws inflict 1-6 points of damage per
hit. They may also attack with their cruel trunk-spike that causes
2-12 points of damage per hit. If both claw attacks hit in the same
round, the opponent is held fast. When held fast, the victim will
suffer 1-3 points of crushing damage per round and subsequent
spike attacks will automatically hit. If the victim can make a suc-
cessful strength check with a —10 penalty, or if greater than 12
points of damage is inflicted on the maelephant, the victim breaks
free.

Maelephants are fond of charging into combat. This increases
their movement rate to 18 and gives them +2 on their attack rolls
for the round.

These creatures also have an impressive breath weapon. Three
times per day, a maelephant can breath a noxious cloud of vapor
that is 10 feet wide and extends 30 feet in front of the creature.
Anyone caught within this cloud must make a saving throw vs.
poison or suffer a complete memory loss. The memory loss will
last until a neutralize poison spell is used (slow poison will have
no effect). Because the gas must come in contact with skin to be
effective, anyone who is wearing clothing that covers at least
50% of their body will gain a +2 bonus to their save.

Maelephants have an array of spell-like abilities they can use
one a time, once per round:

alarm

bind

blade barrier, 3 times per day
entangle

 

 

 

 

 

gust of wind

light

polymorph other, 3 times per day
true seeing

warp wood

Maelephants are immune to attacks from nonmagical weap-
ons. They are never surprised and have infravision to 240’. Their
auditory and olfactory senses are double the human norm. These
lower planar denizens will regenerate at a rate of 2 hit points per
melee round. When guarding something, a maelephant need
never roll morale checks. It will fight until victorious or dead.

Habitat/Society: Maelephants are common guardians of the
lower planes. Commonly, powerful lower planar creatures will
strike a bargain with a maelephant to guard an item or area. The
term of service is typically 100 years. During that time, the
maelephant will be absolutely loyal to the terms of the agreement
and will fight to the death to perform its instructions.

Maelephants are never seen in groups. They will never guard
with another maelephant. In fact, whenever two of these crea-
tures see each other, they will fight to the death. This obligatory
blood-letting is suspended if one of the maelephants is performing
a term guardianship.

Ecology: Originally, maelephants were created by the Dark Eight,
the rulers of the Nine Hells, as servants. The quality of obedience
was considered paramount, and so was bred into their behavior
more powerfully than all other considerations. How these crea-
tures multiplied in numbers and left the exclusive service of the
Dark Eight is unknown. In the lower planes, when beings of
power want something important looked after, they will often
seek out a maelephant.

 

 
Marut

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Nirvana (and upper planes)
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: None
INTELLIGENCE: High (13-14)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Lawful neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1-6

ARMOR CLASS: 0
MOVEMENT: 15

HIT DICE: 15

THACO: 5

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 8-80

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Cause disease

SPECIAL DEFENSES: +3 or better weapons to hit,

regeneration

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 10%

SIZE: L (12" tall)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 36,000

Maruts are the servants of the gods throughout the upper planes.
They go forth from Nirvana and spread the will of those gods to
all the outer planes.

These great creatures look like red-eyed, unliving giants carved
from polished black stone. They seem to be fashioned out of a sin-
gle piece of stone with no discernable joints. Maruts are typically
covered in golden armor with wide plates on the shoulders and
armbands.

Maruts have no input of their own, and therefore do not speak.
They can, and often do, relay messages given to them. They un-
derstand al] languages.

Combat: Maruts are awesome opponents indeed. Their physical
attack alone is enough to fell all but the most powerful oppo-
nents, inflicting 8-80 points of damage from a single, mighty
punch.

Maruts have the following miscellaneous spell-like powers
they can use one at a time, once per round, at will:

animate object

blink

cause disease, against any target within 60 feet
continual light

control winds, 3 times per day

deafness

earthquake, 1 time per day

hold person

lightning bolt, 8-die strength

shades

Maruts are immune to attacks from weapons of less than +3
magical enchantment. They will regenerate 5 hit points per melee
round, Maruts are immune to acid-based attacks. They will take
but half damage from cold and fire-based spells. Trap the soul and
related magics do not affect the maruts. They also are immune to
death spells.

Habitat/Society: Maruts exist for the service of their god. These
creatures will spread the will of their god, be it a god of disease,
love, or magic, wherever they go.

 

~ SK a, ff Wf fis
AEC My | afl’ fi G

 

 

 

Maruts will interact with others only if it directly involves the
service they are currently performing or if they are being hin-
dered from performing that service. In fact, unless they are di-
rectly hindered or affected they will move about, seemingly
mindless of what occurs around them. This is, however, simply a
deception and nothing could be further from the truth. Maruts
are highly intelligent and keenly alert of their environment. Little
happens nearby that these creatures are not aware of.

Although it would seem that the maruts are evil creatures, in
truth they are not. These creatures are servitors only, obeying the
will of their masters to the letter. At times, when the situation
warrants it, their masters may even send them off to aid a deity of
another alignment. Of course when the activities of the maruts in
question stop serving their master’s will, they will leave the scene
immediately.

Ecology: Maruts are enchanted golems imbued with intelligence
and sentience. The marut itself is constructed from pure onyx and
is likely worth hundreds of thousands of gold pieces.

Maruts are totally noncontributory to the ecology. They exist
only to spread the will of their masters or to serve those whom
their master has chosen. They tend to spread the will of their orig-
inal master even when assigned to other tasks.

Maruts are created directly from the will of Rudra, the Indian
god of disease. Because one of Rudra’s favored activities is
spreading disease, her maruts will often be destructive to their en-
vironment, spreading disease to animals, plant-life, and sentient
beings. Often the Indian god will give a marut to a fellow power
as a gift for services rendered. In fact, Rudra has found times
when it serves her ends to assist the causes of good. In those
times, her maruts have been found in the direct service of a good
deity.

All maruts were originally created by Rudra, but have changed
hands a thousand times since.

 

 
Mediator

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Nirvana
FREQUENCY: Very rare (see below)
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: None
INTELLIGENCE: Genius (17-18)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Lawful Neutral
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 5
MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 3

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

 

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-24

 

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 90%

SIZE: M (5' diameter)
MORALE: Average (8-10)
XP VALUE: See below

Mediators are the balancing forces in Nirvana. They ensure that
all things, light and darkness, liquid and solid, etc., maintain
their perfect balance and harmony.

Mediators look like a cluster of geometric shapes made of a
strange green crystal. They are roughly spherical in shape, prick-
ling with protuberances: squares, triangles, trapezoids, and
spheres of all sizes stick out in all directions.

Mediators communicate through empathy—they cannot com-
municate with undead.

Combat: Mediators will rarely enter combat unless it is to balance
out an already existing battle. When they do attack, it is with a
piercing green ray of light that inflicts 2-24 points of damage per
hit and ignites all combustibles. The ray has no range modifiers—
the mediator can fire it on any target it can see.

Mediators have a special power. They can, in essence, create
anything or do anything as long as it is directly relating to main-
taining balance in Nirvana. For game purposes, this means that
they have unlimited wish spells available, but for the purposes of
balance alone. For example, if the amount of liquid matter in Nir-
vana begins to exceed the amount of solid matter, a mediator can
literally transform liquid to solid until the balance is restored, If
two groups are battling with each other, the mediators can cause
the sides to even out by destroying combatants until the sides are
equalized or even by telekinetically stopping the battle. With so
omnipotent a power, it is fortunate for some that there are only
three mediators known to exist in Nirvana.

Since their own destruction would be the greatest threat to bal-
ance possible, the mediator wish ability can be used to save them-
selves from danger. Without even a conscious effort on their part,
the mediators can affect any being trying to attack them, no matter
from where or in what manner the attack is launched. The attacker
will immediately undergo an alignment shift to absolute neutral
and, therefore, cease its attack. Simply put, a mediator cannot be
killed, so there is no experience point total listed for them.

Habitat/Society: The sole purpose of the mediators is to maintain
balance. It is irrelevant whether the balancing is of good and evil,
light and darkness, liquid and solid, etc. The mediators only
know balance. They will be heedless of anything except this sym-
metry of existence, even of sentient life. They are certainly not
evil in this respect, but rather they are amoral in their drive for

 

 

 

perfect equilibrium.

Mediators have gained an almost godlike reputation in Nir-
vana. They are rarely seen, and when they appear it is generally
in order to effect tremendous change in the name of equilibrium.
It must be remembered that even those beings of true neutral
alignment are not perfectly balanced beyond slight error or devia-
tion. Neutrality tends to be inhibited, in some cases, by emotion.
The mediators, however, are neutrality unfettered by emotion.
They are perfectly objective judges and are incapable of bias.
This often causes them to be viewed by some as evil and uncaring.

Ecology: The legend of the mediators is an interesting one. It is
not certain whether the legend is true or not—that is something
lost to the mists of time.

Eons ago, when the outer planes were first forming, the powers
of creation gathered and divided existing space among them.
They created planes of certain alignments that were used as
homes of the corresponding powers. There were great arguments
between powers of the same alignment but slightly differing view-
points, thus were 17 individual planes created when only nine
alignments exist.

When the plane of Concordant Opposition was created, it was
to be the home of the neutral powers. From there they could send
out their influences to maintain balance and order. But the neutral
powers bickered because they disagreed how to organize and con-
struct the inner areas of the plane. Each tried to exert his own in-
dividual influence, causing the plane to become unbalanced.

When the powers of creation saw what had happened, they
cast the powers of neutrality out of Concordant Opposition, thus
closing it off to all beings. They created Nirvana with its perfect
harmony and giant clockwork, and sent the powers of neutrality
there to live. In order that the neutrals not corrupt Nirvana as
they had done with Concordant Opposition, the powers of crea-
tion made the mediators and gave them great power and influ-
ence over balance. Three mediators were made, one each for the
Lights of Balance that shine now at the center of the mysterious
and forbidden plane of Concordant Opposition.

 

 

 
Moon Dog

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Elysium and prime
FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary or small pack (see below)
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: High to exceptional (13-16)
TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Neutral good

NO. APPEARING: 1 or 2-8 (see below)
ARMOR CLASS: 0

MOVEMENT: 30, bipedal 9

HIT DICE: 9+3

THACO: 11

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

DAMAGE/ATTACK;: 3-12

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Bay, howl

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Shadowy hypnotic pattern, +2 or
better weapons to hit

MAGIC RESISTANCE; 25%

 

 

SIZE: M (3' at shoulders)
MORALE: Fanatic (17-18)
XP VALUE: 30,500

Often mistaken for baneful monsters, moon dogs are native crea-
tures of Elysium and champions of the causes of good. They often
appear in the Prime Material plane to fight evil wherever it shows
itself.

Moon dogs look very similar to large wolf hounds. Their
strange heads are slightly human in appearance, giving the ani-
mals a very intelligent look. The creatures’ forepaws are adapt-
able, giving the moon dogs the ability to travel bipedally or on all
fours. They are dark colored animals, ranging from dark gray to
deep black. Moon dogs have amber eyes.

Moon dogs speak their own language, and they can communi-
cate with all canines and lupines as well. They can speak common
using a limited form of telepathy.

Combat: Woe to those who enter combat with a moon dog. These
creatures of good are potent fighters and merciless against evil.
Their powerful bite inflicts 3-12 points of damage.

Moon dogs prefer to attack with their keening how]. This bay-
ing is harmful to evil creatures only. Any evil creature within an
80 foot radius of a baying moon dog is affected as by a fear spell
cast at 12th-level of magic use. Additional moon dogs baying
have a cumulative effect. The howling will also cause 5-8 points
of damage per round to evil creatures within 40 feet. In addition,
the howling will cause intense physical pain to extra-planar crea-
tures of evil alignment so much that they are 5% likely per moon
dog howling to return to their plane. Moon dogs can whine to dis-
pel illusions or bark to dispel evil, once per round.

The following spell-like powers (at 12th-level of use) are availa-
ble to a moon dog one at a time, once per round, at will:

* change self, 3 times per day
cure disease, by lick, 1 time per individual per day
cure light wounds, by lick, 1 time per individual per day
dancing lights
darkness, 15’ radius
detect evil, always active
detect invisibility, always active
detect magic, always active
detect snares & pits, always active
improved invisibility
light
mirror image, 3 times per day
non-detection

 

 

 

 

 

¢ shades, 1 time per day
* slow poison, by lick, 1 time per individual per day
® wall of fog

Moon dogs can become ethereal and have the ability to travel
in the ethereal and Astral plane at will. They have superior vision
equal to double normal vision, including 60' infravision. Com-
bined with an unusually keen sense of smell and hearing, this
grants moon dogs the detection abilities listed above, plus the
ability to detect all illusions. Association with a moon dog for one
hour or more removes charms and acts as a remove curse.

When in shadowy light, a moon dog is able to move in such a
way as to effectively create magic equal to a hypnotic pattern of
shadows. Only evil creatures will be affected. At the same time,
each creature of good within the area will effectively gain a pro-
tection from evil and remove fear spell benefit. Moon dogs may
not attack or perform any other action when weaving this pattern
of shadows, It requires one full round to weave and extends to a
range of 50 feet. The moon dog can dispel magic, but doing so
will force it back to its own plane immediately.

Moon dogs may be damaged only by +2 or better magical
weapons. They are never surprised (due to their keen senses) and
cause opponents to subtrace 3 from their surprise rolls. Moon
dogs are immune to fear spells. They make all saving throws at a
+2 bonus and takes half or quarter damage.

Habitat/Society: Moon dogs are native to the plane of Elysium.
They are champions of good and will often travel about the upper
planes and the Prime Material plane to challenge evil.

Moon dogs are friendly to all good and neutral races and those
friendly to those races. They will not long associate with anyone
because they are constantly on the move, hunting evil.

Ecology: Moon dogs will often communicate with communities
of men, using their telepathy, in order to locate trouble spots
among them.
Mortai

MC8

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Beastlands
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Unknown
INTELLIGENCE: Godlike (21 +)
TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Neutral good (chaotic)

 

 

 

 

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: as

MOVEMENT: FI] 48 (A)

HIT DICE: 20

THACO: 5

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: Special

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Wind and cloud related magic
SPECIAL DEFENSES: None

MAGIC RESISTANCE; 80%

SIZE: G (undetermined dimensions)
MORALE: Fearless (19-20)

XP VALUE: 58,500

Also known as “faces in the clouds” and “eyes of the gods,” mortai
are powerful creatures of the air. They are strange and unex-
plained enigmas found in the skies of the Beastlands.

Though not often seen, mortai appear as great clouds that liter-
ally span the horizon. Along the surface of the cloud are spread
faces of various humans, humanoids and demi-humans. The cen-
ter of the cloud seems to pulse with a golden light and crackle
with immense power.

When they choose to speak with mortals, mortai call up a
booming voice of wind and thunder—they can speak all lan-
guages.

Combat: Mortai are mighty beings with lofty ideals, placing them
above petty battles and common squabbles. Occasionally, how-
ever, they are forced into combat. Their physical attack consists
of a 10-die bolt of lightning. They may use this once per round
with no limit to the number of bolts in a given combat situation.

However, mortai are extremely able denizens of the air, and are
masters of their environment. As such, it is quite difficult to gain
position or advantage enough to actually attack a mortai. First of
all, they are very high in the air, making them difficult to reach.
Secondly, by their nature, mortai are able to use a variety of spell-
like abilities, all at 20th-level of magic use:

aerial servant

air walk, cast on another creature
call lightning, ability given to another
cloudkill, 7 times per day

conjure elemental, air only
control weather, 3 times per day
control winds

death fog

dust devil

fog cloud

gust of wind

ice storm

rainbow

rainbow pattern

whispering wind

wind walk

wind wall

 

 

 

 

 

By nature, mortai will always avoid combat. Their impressive
movement rate in the air makes them difficult to catch. Mortai
will always flee from combat, even against obviously weaker
foes. They will not be goaded into fighting by threats, insults, etc.
They will not attack creatures because of their actions or align-
ment, resorting to combat only when forced to fight.

Habitat/Society: The great beings in the sky are seemingly godlike
in their position. If they have purpose it is unknown. They will,
however, often interact with men, giving them knowledge and
holding discussions of philosophy with them. To this end, mortai
can use legend lore at will. This spell is cast instantly and is al-
ways accurate.

It is thought that perhaps the mortai are collections of good—if
not slightly chaotic—spirits. Sages have recorded that during dis-
cussions with a mortai, they have heard faint voices and laughter
from amongst the clouds.

Another interesting characteristic of mortai is their tendency to
perform what appear to be mild pranks. These great beings have
been known to cause a wind to continually blow someone's hat
from their head, or cause a small rain cloud to follow a man for
hours. These pranks are never evil and never harmful to life and
limb, but at the same time are seemingly without purpose.

Ecology: How the mortai affect the weather and meteorologic
conditions in the Beastlands is unknown. Rain and other weather
conditions seem to be independent of the mortai, although they
can appear as any type of cloud they wish, including dark and
foreboding storm clouds.

 

 
ce CLIMATE/TERRAIN:

Night Hag

MC8

 

 

Lower planes

 

 

 

 

 

FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (15-16)
TREASURE; Nil

ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil

NO. APPEARING: 7

ARMOR CLASS: 0

MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 8

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-12

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Cause disease
SPECIAL DEFENSES: = Spell immunity, +3 or better

weapons to hit
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 65%

 

SIZE: M (5’ tall)
MORALE: Average (8-10)
XP VALUE: 16,000

Night hags are the foul inhabitants of Hades and, for all intents
and purposes, the rulers of it. They are wretched looking females
with hideous dark blue-violet skin, jet black hair, and glowing red
eyes. They have long, wicked claws on their hands and feet and
foul, rotting fangs hang threateningly out their dry, festering lips.

Night hags speak multiple languages, preferring those that help
them in their dealings with evil beings.

Combat: Night hags are thoroughly evil and hate all forms of
good. A night hag will attack any good creature without cause if
she feels she has a reasonable chance of victory.

In physical combat, a night hag can attack with her disgusting
bite, inflicting 2-12 points of damage. Anyone so bitten must save
vs. poison or be inflicted with a disease. Night hags also have a
bewildering variety of spell-like abilities with which they can de-
feat good creatures:

know alignment

magic missile, 4 missiles per casting, 5 times per day
polymorph self

ray of enfeeblement, 3 times per day

sleep, special

eeeees.

A night hag will often try to secure a mortal life in order to turn
it into a larva. Toward this end, they can cast a very powerful
sleep spell that affects up to 12th-level monsters or characters un-
less the victim makes a saving throw vs. spells. Night hags will
use this spell against those of great good or even those of very
selfish evil. When the victim is sleeping, the hag will strangle him
to death and take his soul to Hades as a larva to be used as a ma-
cabre form of currency.

If the sleep spell fails, the night hag will visit the victim nightly
in ethereal form, which it can assume at will, intruding upon the
victim's dreams. In this way the night hag hopes to drive the vic-
tim mad, invading the dream world to ride upon the victim's back
until dawn. The night hag cannot be removed from the back by
the victim, and each nightly ride permanently drains one point
from the victim's constitution. When the victim's constitution
reaches zero, the victim dies, and the night hag returns to Hades
with the larval life-force. The only way to defeat a riding night
hag is to destroy it either in its normal or ethereal form.

Both the sleep and dream intrusion can only be used against a

 

 

 

 

 

mortal who displays selfish evil. The hags use this as an opening
through which they can invade. Beings of actual good cannot be
so harmed.

These foul creatures carry a special periapt called a charm of
blackness. These amulets are created by night hags deep in the
pits of Hades. They will cure any disease the possessor contracts
instantly and automatically. They also give a +2 bonus to all the
hag's saving throws. If one of these periapts should fall into the
hands of a creature of good alignment, it will function fully but
will decay 10% with each usage until it is destroyed. Night hags
lose their ability to become ethereal without their periapt (but it
will not give any other being the power to become ethereal).
Therefore, they will go to great extent to retrieve their periapt if
lost. It takes one month and 100 larvae to create another.

Night hags are immune to the effects of charm, sleep, fear, fire-,
and cold-based attacks. A silver, cold iron, or +3 or better
weapon is needed to harm them.

Habitat/Society: Night hags have no real social structure. They
are the rulers of Hades by default, not through planning and
power. There are just so many of these creatures that they seem to
have inherited the plane.

They are the shepherds and herders of the larvae. Night hags
will round up these pathetic creatures and imprison them by the
hundreds. Fiends of all types will barter with the night hags for
larvae. Tanar'ri (q.v.) and baatezu (q.v.) alike require larvae for
their quasits and imps.

One of the most gruesome dealings the night hags have is with
liches. These undead lords will often go to the night hags and
trade power for larvae that they use to perpetuate their undead
condition.

Ecology: Night hags may be the deepest evil in the lower planes.
They are the only lower planar inhabitants that will actually seek
out men on the Prime Material plane and kill them for the pur-
pose of taking their souls. They will destroy any life form that
they can overpower. Night hags are mercilessly wicked.

 
Nightmare

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Lower planes
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: -4
MOVEMENT: 15, Fl 36 (C)
HIT DICE: 6+6

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 4-10/4-10/2-8
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Burning hooves
SPECIAL DEFENSES: _Paralyzing cloud
MAGIC RESISTANCE: Nil

SIZE: L (6’ at shoulder)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)

XP VALUE: 2,000

Nightmares are the evil steeds of the lower planes, often serving
as mounts for baatezu, tanar’ri, night hags, liches, and powerful
undead lords.

They look like large, powerful horses with a jet black coat.
Nightmares have glowing red eyes, flaming orange nostrils, and
hooves that burn like embers. Their flowing manes and great tails
are ragged and wild.

Nightmares can understand commands from evil riders. They
communicate among themselves by empathy.

Combat: Nightmares are hateful of material life. They will often
attack any non-lower planar creature they encounter (and will
sometimes attack the lower planar creatures, too). They have vi-
cious fangs that inflict 2-8 points of damage on a successful bite.
Their burning hooves each inflict 4-10 (1d6 + 4) points of damage
per attack and will set any combustibles on fire.

During combat, the excitement and fervor of the fight will
cause nightmares to emit a smoking, hot cloud of noxious vapors.
It blinds and chokes all those within 10 feet of the evil steed. Vic-
tims must make a saving throw vs. paralyzation or be at a —2
penalty on their attack and damage dice.

Although they have no wings, nightmares are able to magically
propel themselves through the air at an impressive rate. They
may fly through the Astral and Ethereal planes at will.

Habitat/Society: Nightmares are the servitor steeds of many
lower planar creatures. They are intelligent, however, and cannot
be treated as casually as a simple horse. They will willingly and
gleefully serve as a mount for any mission involving evil. How-
ever, for the unwary rider, a nightmare’s own ambitions can
prove to be insurmountable. These hateful steeds will often do
what they want rather than follow the wishes of their “master.” In
many ways, a nightmare poses the same problems as magical
weapons with large egos.

Anyone on the lower planes who is not a native thereof can at-
tract the attention of a nightmare to secure it as a mount. The
process involves several spells as well as an offering for the crea-
ture’s service. The summoning requires a mage or specialist wiz-
ard of at least 5th level. The following spells must all be cast by
the same spell-user. First, the mage must cast a mount spell. This
conjuration is used to attract the attention of the nightmare.
Next, a monster summoning III spell must be cast to bind the

 

 

 

 

nightmare into service. When that is complete, a wall of fog spell
is cast. If all of this is done properly, the nightmare will come gal-
loping through the fog, nostrils flaring and eyes gleaming, ready
to perform in the service of evil. Lastly, an offering is required.
This may be given by anyone, not just the spell caster. The offer-
ing must be oat-like flakes made from platinum that the night-
mare will eat. The flakes must be of at least 200 gp value.
Whoever feeds the oats to the nightmare will be its master for 72
hours.

Creatures of the lower planes do not perform these steps to
summon a nightmare. It is unknown what dark agreement they
make for a nightmare’s service.

Once per decade, on the plane of Hades, there is a dark and sin-
ister time called Gloom Meet. At this time the various lower pla-
nar denizens will meet and decide how they will spread their will
for the next decade. The nightmares play a special role in Gloom
Meet, for they spread the word that the meeting is about to begin.
As the Gloom Meet approaches, there is a higher concentration of
nightmares and their frequency changes from very rare to uncom-
mon. This is the first indication that Gloom Meet is to occur, and
lasts for approximately two weeks. Immediately prior to the
meeting, the nightmares ride the planes in a terrifying charge that
notifies all that the Gloom Meet has started.

Ecology: Nightmares are the wild steeds of the planes. It is their
place in the lower planes to act as mounts for missions of evil and
dread. They have no biological link to true horses. A nightmare is
merely a foul minion of evil, without need of food or air, that
through some unknown pact has taken the form of a huge, terri-
ble steed. Nightmares are listed as carnivores, based solely on
their habit of eating fallen foes whenever possible. However,
there is nothing to indicate that the nightmares derive any of their
sustenance from the flesh of animals—they more likely gain all
their strength through their service to evil.

 

 

 
Noctral

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Seven Heavens
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Dusk, night
DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Supra-genius (19-20)
TREASURE: G
ALIGNMENT: Lawful good
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 1

MOVEMENT: 1, Fl 36 (C)

HIT DICE: 5

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-8/2-8/2-5
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Swoop

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Surprise

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 30%

SIZE: M (20' wingspan)
MORALE: Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: 7,000

Noctrals are the owl-like inhabitants of the Seven Heavens. These
giant creatures are the benevolent advisors to the other citizens of
the Seven Heavens and, as such, are excellent sources of informa-
tion.

These huge birds look like larger versions of the common owl.
Their tremendous wingspan is around 20 feet, that, spread to its
fullest, makes them an impressive sight to behold. Like owls, noc-
trals have heart-shaped faces and huge eyes with protective inner
eyelids, Their glossy feathers range from a deep russet to gray to
black. Noctrals have a gentle hooting call, but otherwise do not
speak (except through magic).

Noctrals communicate with mortals using telepathy, and with
animals using their speak to animals ability.

Combat: Like owls, noctrals are powerful and dangerous preda-
tors. They are capable of fast, deadly attacks. Noctrals attack
from the air giving them a claw/claw/bite attack. Their large,
razor-sharp claws inflict 2-8 points of damage per strike and their
beaks inflict 2-5 points.

Noctrals also have the ability to make a diving swoop attack.
They must have at least 50 feet of room to make the attack and it
can only be performed one time per two melee rounds, during
which time no other attacks may be made. No beak attack is pos-
sible with a swoop, but the claws are at +2 on the attack dice and
inflict double damage (4-16 points each), When a noctral is div-
ing, it is more difficult to hit, giving attackers a —2 penalty on
their attack dice.

Physical attacks are seldom used by noctrals, however. They
are kind and peaceful creatures that abhor combat and violence.
Noctrals often avoid combat using their spell-like abilities:

invisibility

legend lore, 3 times per day, 15th level of magic use
speak with animals

tongues

Noctrals’ eyes are well adapted to poor lighting. They can see
in total darkness as well as a human can see in daylight. Noctrals’
hearing has a range four times greater than that of a normal hu-
man. These increased senses make surprising a noctral extremely

 

 

 

 

difficult. During the time from sunset to sunrise, noctrals cannot
be surprised. During daylight hours (during which they are nor-
mally sleeping), noctrals can only be surprised on a 1-2. In addi-
tion, noctrals fly in total silence so that others have a —6 penalty
on their surprise rolls versus noctrals.

Habitat/Society: The true power of a noctral is its knowledge.
They are “the keepers of lore and the knowers of history.” Those
who are in need of information in the Seven Heavens will come to
a noctral for help. They can use their powerful legend lore ability
as they see fit. They are also the “knowers of history” and as such
are 80% likely to know any historical fact pertaining to the his-
tory of the Seven Heavens. Each noctral also has an area of exper-
tise much like a sage. Within their area of expertise (i.e. astrology,
mathematics, etc.), noctrals are 80% likely to know any particu-
lar fact.

Noctrals also have the privilege of bring advisors to the gods.
The various powers of the Seven Heavens and other upper planes
will often seek out noctrals for advice or in search of knowledge.
This role makes them special friends to the great powers and, of
course, allows noctrals to exist under their protection. If a noctral
is ever attacked or killed, it is 50% likely that some upper power
will notice and take direct retribution, This retribution will be ei-
ther in the form of direct intervention (only 5% likely) or by send-
ing a powerful good servant to the aid of the noctral (95 % likely).

Ecology: It should be noted that although noctrals are wise beings
and a higher life form than a common owl, they are still predators
and hunt keenly for their food. As dictated by their good nature,
they will only hunt unintelligent prey. It is not uncommon for a
stately noctral, while in the middle of a lengthy discourse on some
matter of arcane knowledge, to excuse himself, swoop down
upon a rabbit, then rip it apart and eat it while he continues to lec-
ture.
Per

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Upper planes

FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)

TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Lawful neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: aa

MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 10

THACO: 11

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-20 (+3 or +6)

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Magical weapon

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Never surprised, regeneration, never
check morale, +1 or better weapons
to hit

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 50%

SIZE: M (6! tall)

MORALE: See below

XP VALUE: 27,500

Pers are the guardians of the portals of the upper planes. They are
tireless warriors and guardians of those gates.

Pers look like well muscled humans of great fighting prowess.
They are dressed in bronze or steel armor of elaborate decora-
tion. They wear huge helmets, often adorned with large plumes
or various other ornaments. They carry great, frost-covered
swords of intelligence and magical power. Although these guard-
ians are not evil in any way, their countenance and appearance is
grim and foreboding.

Pers speak the languages they knew in life and the common
tongue.

Combat: Pers have truesight and are never surprised. They are
continuously protected by an aura that has the effect of a shield
spell. Pers regenerate three hit points per melee round. They are
absolutely fanatical warriors and will never leave their post. If
challenged, pers will battle to the death, never checking morale.

Pers carry great two-handed swords that they can wield for 2-
20 points of damage per hit. The swords are intelligent, magical
weapons. Each is a sword +3, frost brand, +6 vs. fire-using/
dwelling creatures (see DMG, page 185). These intelligent frost
brands are imbued with the essence of a servitor of an upper
power. Each has an alignment of lawful neutral, an intelligence of
15, and ego of 18, and the following special abilities:

confusion, special purpose power, 2d6 rounds
detect evil/good, 10' radius

detect invisible objects, 120' radius

detect magic, 10' radius

The purpose of these weapons is to guard the portals between
the planes from unauthorized intruders. They speak the common
language. Pers are in total agreement with their weapons so there
is no conflict with its ego. However, if another being tries to use
the weapon, there will be conflict.

Pers also have a number of spell-like powers that they can use
at will, at 10th level of spell-use, once per round or as stated:

* blade barrier
® charm person or mammal, 7 times per day
* cure serious wounds, 3 times per day

 

 

 

 

 

 

ESP

light

mirror image
read magic

Although a per is powerful, he is aware of his limitations. Pers
have an innate ability to size up an opponent and know its fight-
ing prowess. This ability does not, however, extend to spell-use.
Pers are intelligent, and if one feels he is outmatched by a group
of adventurers, he will make challenge to the obvious leader or
most powerful warrior of the opposing group.

Per are hit only by +1 or better weapons.

Habitat/Society: Pers have one purpose: to guard the portals be-
tween the upper planes. They are absolutely dedicated to this
cause and cannot be swayed from it. They will guard the portals
against unauthorized intruders, including both evil intruders and
those who mean to do harm. In support of this purpose, they will
use both their ESP power and the detect evil/good power of their
sword.

Pers have a form of limited symbiotic mental link with the vari-
ous powers of their plane. If a per is under duress or even killed,
those powers will become aware of it. There will always be rein-
forcements sent if a portal is breached, usually in the form of ad-
ditional pers.

Ecology: Pers are essentially humans in all respect. They are the
spirits of those humans who were dedicated to their cause in life.
It is a great honor for a fallen human to become a per. New pers
are created by the will of greater good beings, either when their
numbers are low or when there are new portals created that need
guardians.

 

 
Phoenix

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ie CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Elysium
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Genius (17-18)
TREASURE: O
ALIGNMENT: Neutral good
NO. APPEARING: 1-3
ARMOR CLASS: —2
MOVEMENT: 6, Fl 39 (D)
HIT DICE: 20
THACO: 5
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1 or 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-12 or 1-8/1-8
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Shriek
SPECIAL DEFENSES: +3 or better weapons to hit, never

surprised

 

MAGIC RESISTANCE:

50%

SIZE: L (40 +’ wing span)
MORALE: Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: 87,000

The phoenix is a great, extra-planar bird thought to represent the
spirit of freedom and rebirth. It is a mortal creature that displays
the ultimate in godlike detachment.

A phoenix appears as a large bird with a 40' wingspan and
bright, multi-colored feathers. The plumage includes bright vio-
let, scarlet, crimson and flaming orange. Its beak and claws are of
blue-violet. A phoenix's eyes are a deep, glowing ruby color.

In addition to its own language, a phoenix can speak with all
avians. It otherwise communicates with a limited telepathy or by
empathy.

Combat: The phoenix is a free and benevolent spirit and does not
derive pleasure from attacking others. But if the need for combat
arises, a phoenix is a swift and powerful foe. It can attack in the
air with two powerful claws inflicting 1-8 points of damage per
strike. When on the ground it attacks with its great beak for 2-12
points of damage per hit. The phoenix is an intelligent and magi-
cal beast, however, so it usually opts for more effective measures
of attack and defense.

A phoenix will always open up each round of combat with a
piercing shriek that gives the creature an edge in the combat
round. All opponents of 12 hit dice or less within 30 feet of a
shrieking phoenix receive a +3 penalty on their initiative dice.
The shriek does not affect the phoenix's combat roles in any way.

Every phoenix has the following spell-like powers, at 20th level
of magic use, usable once per round, one at a time, at will:

affect normal fires

audible glamer

blindness

blink

blur

call woodland beings, 1 time per day
color spray, 3 times per day
continual light

control temperature, 10' radius
dancing lights

detect charm, always active

  
 
  

 

 

detect evil, always active

detect magic, always active
duo-dimension, 1 time per day
find traps

find the path, 1 time per day

fire charm

fire seeds, 1 time per day
incendiary cloud, 1 time per week
invisibility

misdirection

neutralize poison, 1 time per day
polymorph self, 3 times per day
produce fire

protection from evil, 10' radius, always active
pyrotechnics

reincarnate, 1 time per day
remove fear, within a 10-foot radius
remove curse

snake charm

veil, 1 time per day

wall of fire, 1 time per day

Also, by spreading its wings and performing a ritual dance, the
phoenix can perform the following spell-like abilities at 40th level
of magic use:

® dismissal
© dispel evil
* dispel magic

Any of these three abilities can be used by a phoenix as many
times as desired, but can only be done one at a time and each
takes a full round to complete. No other activities—such as a
shriek—can be done in conjunction with these three powers.

A touch of its wing is equal to a cure light wounds spell, with 2
touches possible per individual per day per phoenix. A touch of
the comb gives an effect equal to cure disease, but only once per

day per person.
Phoenix

MC8

 

When hard-pressed, the phoenix is able to cause spilled drop-
lets of its own blood to act as fire seeds of the holly berry type,
one being created for every five points of damage taken by the
phoenix.

In extreme situations, the phoenix can create a 40th-level com-
bination of fire storm (20' high X 5' wide X 8' deep) and incendi-
ary cloud, even if it has already used these powers previously.
This destroys the adult phoenix but leaves behind a young phoe-
nix with all the powers and abilities of its predecessor.

The phoenix can travel astrally or ethereally at will. They are
hit only +3 or better magical weapons. The phoenix can never be
surprised. It has infravision to 120 feet.

Habitat/Society: Phoenixes are strange and enigmatic creatures.
They are held in very high regard in the legends of many tribes of
barbarians and in other, primitive cultures. It is said that the
phoenix is the embodiment of rebirth. This is symbolized in the
classic imagery of the self-immolation of the phoenix from which
a new bird is formed. This is seen as the ultimate sacrifice for the
cause of good and thus the phoenix are considered noble crea-
tures.

Legend states that the phoenix has an extremely long lifespan.
Some reports claim they can live to be over 1,000 years old, while
others suggest it to be as high as 12,000 years. When it is time for
the phoenix to die, it goes far into the mountains away from civi-
lization. At the very top of these peaks, the phoenix builds a great
nest made of straw and various herbs. The phoenix will lie in the
nest, taking its last look at the world it knows. Satisfied that its
work in the world is at an end, it then immolates itself in a flash of
great flame and light. When the flames die down, there in the
nest, which remains untouched by flames, is a young phoenix ar-
rayed in bright colors like its parent before it. Legend then sug-
gests that the phoenix must fly away to the temple of the sun and
there bury the mummified corpse of its parent.

In general, phoenixes are seclusive creatures, tending to make
their lairs away from the worlds of humanoid beings. Though
they have the ability to travel through the Astral and Ethereal
planes (and thus to any inner and outer plane), they will generally
tend to stay on Elysium or in a secluded place on the Prime Mate-
rial plane.

There are as many legends of the phoenix as there are cultures,
each with its own slightly differing viewpoint. Some believe the
phoenix to be the benevolent symbol of death, only appearing
when someone's time is up among the living. Other cultures—
primarily evil—see the phoenix as the symbol of destruction and
rage, bringing fiery devastation in its wake. Still other cultures re-
cord their phoenix to be a friend and benefactor of good beings.

Although a wealth of mystery surrounds the phoenix, still
there are some things that are known for sure. It is obvious that
the phoenix is a champion of good. Although is seems these crea-
tures do not actively seek out evil to destroy, they will rarely pass
up such an opportunity when it presents itself. Also, despite the
vast differences in ideology, belief, and philosophy in the various
cultures that revere the phoenix, one thing remains constant: the
phoenix is the symbol of creation by destruction. Some cultures
believe that fire is the one great purifier, cleansing all that it

touches. Others believe that fires merely destroys. With the phoe-
nix, both are true. In its own reproduction, fires destroys the old

bird, taking with it many centuries of life and wisdom, yet it cre-
ates a new phoenix with a new mind, thus purifying the line.

Ecology: Of all magical or enchanted creatures, the phoenix is
perhaps most sought after by alchemists and sages alike. There is
almost no part of a phoenix that cannot be used in a magical po-
tion or for research.

The feathers of the phoenix have a great many uses. They can
be used to adorn a staff of healing, they can be used to make po-
tions of extra-healing, and a many other healing magic uses. The
eyes, beak, and talons of a phoenix are very valuable in the open
market, often commanding 5,000 gp and up. Of course it is not al-
ways easy to find a buyer on the open market, because many cul-
tures consider it a bad omen or taboo violation to kill a phoenix.

The exact nature of the phoenix can only be guessed at by
scholars. Al] phoenixes are male and the reproduction cycle con- oe
sists entirely of the self-immolation. Whether this is a natural bio-
logical reproduction cycle or a magical birth is unclear. As stated,
no female phoenix exist.

 

Call Phoenix (Conjuration/Summoning)
6th-level Priest Spell, Animal Sphere

Range: 0

Components: V, S, M

Duration: 1 round per level of caster
Casting Time: 2 rounds *
Area of Effect: Special

Saving Throw: None

This potent priest spell enables the caster to actually summon
a phoenix that will come and aid him. The most stringent re-
striction to this is the caster must be of good alignment or be a
druid. Evil or nondruid neutral priests cannot summon a
phoenix.

When cast, a phoenix will always come to aid. However, de-
pending on how far away the nearest phoenix is, it may take
some time for it to appear. One of these powerful creatures *
will appear in 1d8—1 rounds. A modified roll of ‘0’ indicates
that a phoenix will appear right away in a huge burst of smoke
and flame.

Because the caster must be good or be a druid, there is sel-
dom a conflict of interest between the phoenix and the sum-
moner. However, a phoenix will never attack beings of good
alignment (unless there is an extremely good reason for it). It
will, however, risk its own life if the cause mandates such
action and will further the aims of good that the summoner
has undertaken.

When the spell has expired, the phoenix does not disappear,
but it is then free to do what it will. This may in fact be what
the caster summoned it for, or it may leave if it feels the rea-
sons for its summoning were insufficient.

The material components for this spell are three diamonds
of at least 500 gp value (which are consumed by the energies of
the spell) and a red hot coal.

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

Slaad

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Red Blue Green Gray Death
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Limbo Limbo Limbo Limbo Limbo
FREQUENCY: Uncommon Rare Very rare Very rare Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Group Group Group Group Group
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any Any Any Any
DIET: Carnivore Carnivore Carnivore Carnivo re Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7) Low (5-7) Average (8-10) High (13-14) Genius (17-18)
TREASURE: K,Q K,Q R R (X 2) z
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic neutral Chaotic neutral Chaotic neutral Chaotic neutral Chaotic neutral
NO. APPEARING: 3-18 2-12 1-6 1-4 1-2
ARMOR CLASS: 4 2 0 2 -4
MOVEMENT: 6 6 a 12 12
HIT DICE: 7*3 8+4 9+5 10+6 15+7
THACO: 13 13 11 11 5
NO. OF ATTACKS: 3 2 3 3 or2 3 or2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4/1-4/2-16 2-12/2-12/2-12/ 3-8/3-8/2-16 4-10/4-10/2-16 3-18/3-18/2-20

2-12/2-16 or sword or sword +6
(strength bonus)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Stun, egg-pellet Disease See below Magical weapons See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below +1 or better +1 or better See below +3 or better
weapons to hit weapons to hit weapon to hit

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 30% 40% 50% 60% 70%
SIZE: L (8' tall) L (10’ tall) L(7+' tall) M (6' tall) M (6' tall)
MORALE: Average (8-10) Steady(11-12) Elite (13-14) Champion (15-16) Fanatic (17-18)
XP VALUE: 7,500 16,500 27,500 45,000 61,500

 

ee
ci =
a

=
ee
—F

 

:

 

 

The slaadi are great frog-like beings, who dwell on the outer
plane of Limbo where also live the githzerai (q.v.). Their form is
of a large bipedal frog, though some of the more powerful slaadi
have polymorph self or shape change abilities and will sometimes
appear as men (see the individual descriptions below). In frog
form their heads are huge and their claws are extremely sharp.

Slaadi have powerful symbols embedded into their foreheads that
signify their rank and status.

Slaadi speak their own language and, occasionally, some addi-
tional evil languages. Special telepathy allows them to under-
stand and converse with all things.

Red Slaad

Slaadi are vicious combatants that are quick to attack all other
creatures. They can be ruthless when encountered in numbers, of-
ten surrounding smaller groups of beings and bullying and tor-
menting them before finally slaying the lot.

Combat: Red slaadi attack with two claws for 1-4 points of dam-
age per hit and its bite for 2-16 points. They are not terribly intel-
ligent creatures, so choose predictable, uninspired tactics. As
long as they are in large groups, they will tend to attack ruthlessly
with their claws and bites.

Red slaadi have a special gland under the skin of each claw.
When one hits with a claw attack, there is a 25% chance that an
egg-pellet is transferred to its opponent's body. The egg-pellet be-
gins to slowly move through the victim's body—often without
the victim even knowing he has been infected by the pellet—auntil
it reaches the chest cavity. There the egg-pellet gestates for three
months, forming a baby red slaad that —once formed—eats its
way out of the victim's body, killing him. The victim falls ex-
tremely ill 24 hours before the baby slaad eats its way out. An
egg-pellet can only be detected by using a detect evil spell. One
can be destroyed by a remove curse or similar magic.

Red slaadi regenerate at a rate of 3 hit points per melee round.
They can attempt to gate in 1-2 additional red slaadi twice per day
with a 35% chance of success. Once per day, red slaadi may stun
by emitting a loud croak that affects all opponents within 20 feet
of the slaad. Victims must make a saving throw vs. petrification
or be incapacitated for two rounds.

 
Slaad

Blue Slaad

Blue slaad are ruthless warriors that specialize in mass combat.

Combat: Blue slaadi have two razor-sharp bone rakes sticking
out from the back of each hand. These potent weapons inflict 2-
12 points of damage on a successful hit. Blue slaadi have perfected
their fighting style with these rakes, effectively giving them two
attacks per hand. Their bite does 2-16 points of damage per hit
and has a 10% chance of infecting the slaad’s opponent with a rot-
ting disease like that of a mummy (q.v.).
Blue slaadi have the following spell-like abilities:

¢ hold person, one person only
® passwall
© telekinesis

They may attempt to gate in either 1-4 red slaadi, 1-2 blue
slaadi, or 1 green slaad. They may attempt a gate four times per
day, with a 40% chance of success on each attempt.

Green Slaad

Tougher and more hardy then the red and blue slaadi, the green
slaadi are the highest form of lesser slaadi.

Combat: These creatures can attack with their claws for 3-8
(1d6 +2) points of damage and their powerful bite for 2-16 points
of damage. They prefer to use their innate powers or gate in other
slaadi when a need for combat arises, but they will fight viciously if

Green slaadi have the following spell-like powers:

© darkness, 15' radius

© delayed blast fireball, 1 time per day
© detect invisibility

* detect magic

« ESP

* fear

® locate object

polymorph self

produce flame

telekinesis

They may attempt to gate in 1-6 red slaadi, 1-4 blue slaadi, 1-2
green slaadi, or 1 gray slaad. There is a 50% chance of the gate be-
ing successful, and it may be attempted once per hour.

Green slaadi are harmed only by +1 or better weapons. If a
green slaad has its material form destroyed, but its symbol re-
mains intact, it will reform into a blue slaad in 24 hours. It will re-
main a blue slaad for one year and one day at which time it will
regain its green slaad status.

Grey Slaad

Also known as the executioners, the gray slaadi are great slaadi.
They derive immense pleasure from the physical attack.

Combat: They may use a claw/claw/bite routine for 4-10 points
of damage from their wicked claws and 2-16 points of damage
from their bite. They will often polymorph into human form, in
which case they attack with a magical long sword +2. There isa
25% chance that a gray slaad will have a more powerful sword,
randomly determined.

Gray slaadi have the following spell-like powers:

© advanced illusion

® darkness, 15’ radius
© fear

© flame strike

* infravision

MCs

© invisibility

© know alignment

lightning bolt

power word, blind, 1 time per day

shape change, between slaad and man only
symbol, pain, 1 time per day

wind walk

They may attempt to gate in 1-4 gray slaadi once per day witha
40% chance of success. They can enchant an item given sufficient
time and materials.

Gray slaadi can travel the planes at will and are the slaadi most
often sent to the Prime Material plane. They are immune to cold-
based and disintegration attacks. They are hit by +2 or better
weapons only.

Death Slaad

The greatest of their kind, these awesomely powerful slaadi are
the true masters of their race.

Combat: Their powerful claws can strike for a devastating 3-18
points of damage. Anyone so struck must make a check against
their constitution or be stunned for 1-6 melee rounds. Their bite
inflicts 2-20 points of damage. They have a 18/00 strength (+6
damage adjustment) in human form.

Death slaadi are very fond of using a human form. They will
typically appear as a large, powerful human wielding a magical
sword. In human form they attack twice per round, have at least
12 charisma and retain their great strength (18/01). Only +2 or
better weapons can harm a death slaadi.

Death slaadi have the following spell-like powers:

© advanced illusion

® astral spell

© cloudkill

© darkness, 15' radius

® detect magic

® detect invisibility

e ESP

© fear

® fireball, 1 time per day

© flame strike

© invisibility

© locate object

© phantasmal killer, 1 time per day
¢ shape change, between slaad and man only
® symbol, any type, 1 time per day
* unholy word, 1 time per day

* wind walk

Once per turn they may gate in 1-8 of any type of slaad except
other death slaadi. This gate is always successful. They, too, can
enchant an item if given time and equipment. THey are hit only
by +3 or better weapons.

Habitat/Society: Slaadi have a very hierarchial society. Their
caste system is rigid not because of any respect for regulation, but
rather because the strong will destroy the weak for disobedience.

The red, blue, and green are considered to be lesser slaadi, and
as such are often forced to act as servants for the greater slaadi,
the gray and death. The death slaadi are the absolute masters of
their race. Red and blue slaadi will not aid each other except in the
direst of emergencies.

Ecology: Although the slaadi are inhabitants of the outer planes
and are often found traveling the lower planes for one reason or
another, these creatures have little or nothing to do with the
Blood War between the baatezu and the tanar’ri.

 

 
Tanar’ri

MC8

 

Imagine an entire race of creatures—whose numbers are uni-
maginably vast—whose minds are filled with nothing but hatred,
death, and vile contempt. Imagine beings so dark as to make the
blackest pitch of night seem bright by comparison. Imagine the
tanar'ri.

The Abyss is an infinite, empty place of despair. It is the dis-
gusting toil and labor of existence made tangible. Infinite layers
of bleak despair are stacked endlessly atop one another in the
Abyss, chaos and hopelessness reigning everywhere. That is the
home of the tanar’ri. There, where others linger in endless tor-
ment, the tanar’ri thrive.

In the broadest terms, tanar’ri are chaotic and evil. The less in-
telligent often attack without question and fight until slain. True
and greater tanar’ri often roam the Astral and Ethereal planes—
their attention is attracted to persons in an ethereal state.

Combat: In addition to the separate characteristics and abilities of
each sort of tanar’ri, they all share these spell-like powers:

e darkness, 15' radius

© infravision

© teleport without error

They also can gate in large numbers of other tanar’ri at will, as

defined for each individual.
Tanar'ri are affected by the listed attack forms as noted below:

 

Attack Damage
acid full
cold half
electricity (lightning) none
fire (magical) half
fire (nonmagical) none
gas (poisonous, etc.) half
iron weapon full
magic missile full
poison none
silver weapon full*

“greater tanar'ri take half damage from silver weapons.

All tanar'ri have a form of telepathy that enables them to com-
municate with any intelligent life form regardless of any language
barriers. Tanar'ri with average or better intelligence are able to
converse.

Most of the time, the Abyss-forged magical weapons of the
tanar'ri dissolve upon the death of the creature. When one
doesn’t, it is probably that the weapon in question originated
elsewhere.

Habitat/Society: There are five different varieties of tanar'ri, each
with its own particular niche in the Abyss. They are, listed in or-
der of ascending power, least, lesser, greater, true, and guardian.
The divisions are as follows:

Least Lesser Greater
dretch alu-fiend babau
manes bar-lgura chasme
rutterkin cambion nabassu
succubus

True Guardian

balor molydeus

glabrezu

hezrou

marilith

nalfeshnee

vrock

These classifications of the tanar’ri actually mean very little in
their lives. They are merely broad estimates of their destructive
power. The tanar’ri are not subtle and have little use for anything
besides power, and a strong lesser tanar’ri who bests a weaker
greater cousin is awarded greater status in the Abyss. Such petty
battles of political positioning are virtually endless on the plane.
The only exception to these endless power struggles is the moly-
deus, or guardian tanar'ri that seem to be curiously outside of the
tanar’ri power structure.

As fiends, the tanar’ri are involved in the ongoing Blood War.
In fact, they are one of the two major antagonists of that ancient
war. For as long as the tanar’ri have existed, they have waged war
against their ancient enemies, the baatezu.

There are vast differences in the way that the tanar’ri wage war
as opposed to the baatezu. The baatezu are an organized lot,
taken to fighting their battles with form and structure and relying
on strategy. The tanar’ri, however, are the opposite. They are a
horde of chaos and disorder, tending to use their great numbers to
wage wars of attrition. In their favor, the tanar’ri have almost
endless numbers to draw upon. It is difficult to estimate how
many tanar’ri there actually are considering they inhabit an infi-
nite number of infinitely sized planes, but there are easily 100 or
more times as many tanar’ri as there are baatezu.

The only reason that the Blood War is waged at all by this
seemingly discorded race is that the true tanar'ri seem to have a
primal urge to wage the battles and thus force those less powerful
than themselves to comply with their wishes.

Ecology: Tanar'ri are a subset of the far larger race of fiends, or
lower planar creatures of supernatural power, according to the
definitions made by mankind. It is fairly interesting that sages de-
lineate fiends with a definition that would be meaningless if man-
kind did not exist, for fiends doubtless do not consider their
abilities to be supernatural.

Most tanar’ri feed on either the flesh or the life force of other
living beings. It appears that they can derive more nutrition from
a victim by instilling more terror in it before the kill. Whereas
most predators simply stalk and then kill, tanar'ri have a third
step; stalk, terrify, kill.
Tanar’ri, Greater—Babau

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: The Abyss
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Genius (17-18)
TREASURE: D
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1 (rarely: 1-2)
ARMOR CLASS: =a
MOVEMENT: 15

HIT DICE: 8+14
THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: lor3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: by weapon or 2-5/2-5/2-8 +7

(strength bonus)

 

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Corrosion, gaze, backstab
SPECIAL DEFENSES: +1 or better weapons to hit, thief
abilities

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 50%

SIZE: M (7’ tall)
MORALE: Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: 42,500

Babaus are greater tanar’ri that roam the layers of the Abyss col-
lecting lesser and least tanar'ri to swell the ranks of the vast arm-
ies of the Blood War.

These horrid creatures look much like great skeletons covered
with dark, form-fitting leather. They have a great horn protrud-
ing from the back of their skulls. Babaus typically have long,
wicked claws covered with dirt, blood, and decaying flesh. Their
movements are very quick, sharp, and mechanical, emphasizing
their inhumanness as they walk the foul Abyss.

Babaus communicate using telepathy.

Combat: Babaus can make use of any weapon they find. They of-
ten have enchanted and magical weapons (20% of the time; deter-
mine magical weapon randomly). It should be noted that babaus
have a strength of 19, and gain +7 damage adjustment.

These gruesome monsters also have potent physical attacks.
They can inflict 2-5 points of damage per claw attack, and 2-8
points of damage with their sharp, wicked horn. The babaus are
very intelligent and will always prefer to use other means of at-
tack before their natural attack forms, but they will gladly fight
hand-to-hand if necessary.

Babaus generate a slick, dark red substance that covers their
bodies. This foul jelly is very slippery and will cause all type S
and P weapons to do but half damage against them. This liquid
also has a corrosive quality to it, giving it two main advantages
during combat. First, if the liquid comes into contact with ex-
posed flesh (such as during grappling attacks or other contact), it
will burn for 1-6 points of damage. Secondly, it has a chance per
hit of corroding a weapon and making it useless. Metal weapons
must make a saving throw vs. acid with each hit or be corroded.
Corrosion renders a normal weapon useless. Magical weapons
simply lose one “plus.”

Any creature meeting the gaze at the glowing red eyes of a ba-
bau must make a saving throw vs. spells or be affected as if
touched by a ray of enfeeblement. Their gaze range is 20'. The
gaze can affect only one opponent per round and is in addition to
normal attacks.

In addition to those available to all tanar’ri, babaus have the
following spell-like powers that can be used one at a time, once
per round, at will:

 

 

 

 

 

® dispel magic

© fear

° fly

* heat metal

® levitate

* polymorph self

They may attempt to gate in 1-6 cambions or 1 babau with a
40% chance of success. They may attempt a gate only once per
day. There is also a chance that a true tanar’ri will come to the aid
of a babau in trouble (see below).

Babaus have all abilities of a 9th-level thief (pick pockets 30%,
open locks 30%, find/remove traps 25%, move silently 95%,
hide in shadows 80%, detect noise 35%, climb walls 90%, read
languages 30%, backstab * 4).

Babaus are immune to attacks from nonmagical weapons.

Habitat/Society: Babaus are typically hated by the other tanar'ri
because they roam around “recruiting” lesser beings into the vast
Abyssmal armies. It is not uncommon for numbers of lesser
tanar’ri to gang up on a babau to destroy it. Fortunately, the ba-
bau have great power.

Because the true tanar'ri (q.v.) have a primal desire to wage the
Blood War, they have a close tie with babaus. If a babau is at-
tacked, there is 20% chance that a true tanar'ri (randomly deter-
mined) will notice and come to the aid of the babau. Note that
this is not done for any sense of loyalty, but rather to further the
Blood War. This causes many of the lesser tanar'ri to fear the ba-
baus even more.

Ecology: Babaus are inherently important to the ecology of the
Abyss. According to the true tanar’ri (who are, presumably,
among the greatest powers of the Abyss), the only purpose of the
lesser and least tanar'ri is to fight in the Blood War. Because the
babaus are the grim recruiters of those armies, they are viewed as
being integral to the Abyss and important in the overall scheme of
the Blood War.

 

 
Tanar’ri, Greater—Chasme

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: The Abyss
FREQUENCY: Common
ORGANIZATION: Group
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average to very (8-12)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil

NO. APPEARING: 1-6

ARMOR CLASS: a
MOVEMENT: 6, Fl 24 (D)

HIT DICE: 8+2

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-8/2-8/1-4
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Wounding, sleep drone, terror
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 50%

SIZE: M (7' long)
MORALE: Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: 30,000

Wretched and horrifying, the chasme travel the layers of the
Abyss in search of tanar’ri that do not wish to participate in the
Blood War.

Perhaps of all the tanar’ri, the chasme are the most terrifying to
behold. They are an abomination, a sickening cross between hu-
man and giant fly. These large creatures have the body of a fly
with unnatural human arms in the front and a vaguely human
head. Their mouths are tiny, but their noses are sharp horn-like
and used to bite and draw blood. These creatures can walk on
floors, walls, and ceilings as they wish.

Chasme communicate using telepathy.

Combat: The mere sight of a chasme is enough to cause terror.
Anyone viewing a chasme must save versus spells or flee in terror
for 1-4 hours.

Literally the punishers of tanar’ri, the chasme live to fight.
Their physical attacks consist of a claw/claw/nose routine. Their
claws inflict 2-8 points of damage per hit and will continue to
bleed profusely for 2 points of damage per round until magically
healed (cure light wounds, etc.). A chasme can also attack with its
sharp nose, inflicting 1-4 points of damage.

Chasmes will often buzz and drone in a horrid, rasping voice.
Potential victims must save vs. spell once per encounter or fall
into a comatose sleep. Sleeping victims must be splashed with wa-
ter or vigorously stimulated to awaken them. Otherwise, sleep
persists for 2-8 hours or until the chasme completely drains the
victim's blood, at a rate of 1-4 points per round.

In addition to those available to all tanar'ri, chasmes also have
the following spell-like powers, at 8th level of spell use, usable
once per round, one at a time, at will:

detect good, always active
detect invisibility, always active
insect plague

ray of enfeeblement

telekinesis

Three times per day, a chasme may attempt to gate in the fol-
lowing: 2-20 manes, 2-5 cambion, or 1 chasme. There is a 40%
chance this will be successful.

a”

 

Habitat/Society: The chasme act as the punishers of the tanar'ri.
They travel among the layers of the Abyss in order to exact pun-
ishment on those who do not fight in the Blood War. This punish-
ment is, of course, lingering, painful death.

The Abyss is an endless place. It is chaos within chaos within
still more chaos. Creatures of all twisted and disgusting forms
travel those countless layers, themselves in countless numbers.
How the chasme are able to tell which of the tanar’ri are actually
fulfilling their role within the mighty Blood War and which are
not is a great mystery. Although tanar’ri as a whole are not a very
psychically aware race, perhaps these creatures do have a form of
psychic power that allows them to read the thoughts or empathi-
cally sense the emotional state of any tanar'ri they encounter.
Whether or not this ability extends to nontanar’ri is a matter of
complete speculation, but if it does, these monsters would indeed
be fearsome opponents.

In return for this duty, the chasme are not sent to the “front
lines” to fight in combat formations. Instead they guarantee the
filling of those ranks with other hapless tanar’ri.

Perhaps the most gruesome of the tanar’ri, the chasme interact
with the Blood War as wardens and executioners. This makes them
extremely unpopular among the tanar’ri. Because of this, chasme
are often subject to attack on sight. Only their power and the back-
ing of the true tanar’ri keep the from being totally annihilated.

Of note, however, is that the destructive activities of the
chasme do not negatively affect the war effort of the tanar’ri at
all, The fiends of the Abyss are present in nearly endless numbers,
thus the losses inflicted by the chasme are not felt in the war.

Ecology: Chasme reproduce from eggs—any chasme can lay up
to 1,000 eggs per day. Eggs hatch in three days, the hatchlings
growing to adults in seven more.

Chasme wings have been used in brews to create potions of

flying.
Tanar’ri, Greater—Nabassu

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: The Abyss or Prime Material Plane
FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore

INTELLIGENCE: High (13-14)

TREASURE: Q (* 10)

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 4to -5

MOVEMENT: 12, Fl 15 (C)

HIT DICE: 7+2to7+20

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-8/2-8/3-12 +7 (strength bonus)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Death gaze, backstab, paralyzation
SPECIAL DEFENSES: +1 or better weapons to hit
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 50%

SIZE: M (7' tall)

MORALE: Champion (15-16)

XP VALUE: Mature: 40,500

Fledgeling: 22,000

Nabassu are foul creatures that live portions of their lives on the
Prime Material plane. These monsters are spawned in the Abyss,
but travel to the Prime Material plane while they mature.

At first sight a nabassu is unmistakably a tanar’ri. They are gar-
goylish in appearance, standing some seven feet tall. They are gaunt
with tightly corded muscles. A nabassu’s skin is leathery in texture
and they have great claws on their hands and feet. Their eyes gleam a
steely grey and their mouths are lined with sharp fangs.

Nabassu communicate using telepathy.

Combat: The nabassu begin life in an immature state, which is
relatively rare among the tanar’ri. Their physical attack, how-
ever, is equally as potent whether young or adult. They have a
strong claw/claw/bite routine, their sharp claws inflicting 2-8
points of damage per successful attack and their teeth inflicting 3-
12 points. They have a number of magic-based attack forms, but
derive pleasure from attacking with their bare hands, especially
when fighting a helpless enemy (this affords greater terror in the
victim and, therefore, greater pleasure for the nabassu).

Nabassu go through two distinct phases in which their combat
powers are drastically different: fledgeling and mature.

Nabassu Fledgeling

Nabassu fledglings begin life with AC 4 and 7 hit dice. When
they pass into the Prime Material plane (see Habitat/Society be-
low), they gain an additional two hit points from growth (thus
giving them 7 +2 hit dice). They grow and gain power by slaying
and devouring humans on the Prime Material plane. With each
such grisly slaying, a nabassu will gain an additional hit point and
a “half factor” of armor class. For example, if a nabassu were to
pass into the Prime Material plane and devour two humans, it
would have 7 +4 hit dice and an armor class of 3. After slaying
and devouring 18 humans, a nabassu is at full growth and powers
(AC -5 and 7 +20 hit dice).

Immature nabbasu have the following spell-like abilities:

e darkness, 15' radius
e death gaze, 1 time per hit point above 7 hit dice per day.

Immature nabbasu do not gain the spell-like abilities available
to other tanar'ri. Their death gaze causes anyone they look at to
save vs. spells or become a ghast (or ghoul if the victim is a demi-

 

 

 

 

human). The change is permanent and irrevocable. The only way
to bring peace to the victim is to slay him outright.
Immature nabassu also have some thief abilities: move silently
40%, hide in shadows 50%, detect noise 55%, and backstab * 2.
They are affected by attacks from magic or cold-wrought iron
weapons only. Nabassu have a 19 strength gaining bonuses to
their damage dice (+7 damage adjustment).

Mature Nabassu

Upon reaching full growth, nabassu gain those spell-like abilities
available to all tanar’ri, plus the following spell-like powers:

energy drain

regenerate, 20 hit points per day
silence, 15" radius

vampiric touch

They may summon 2-5 ghasts one time per day provided they
are in the Abyss. Mature nabassu may become ethereal at will, up
to twice per day. Also, any creature within 10 feet must save vs.
paralyzation or be paralyzed for 1d10 rounds.

Habitat/Society: Nabassu are a scourge of humanity. They are the
only tanar’ri (and only fiend, for that matter) that lives a portion of
its life on the Prime Material plane. These creatures seem to have
no place in the Blood War which makes them utterly unique in the
tanar’ri race. Once they return to the Abyss from their tour of car-
nage on the prime, they take up residence in some fortress and live
there for the duration of their immortal existence.

What role these monsters play is unknown. Perhaps the slaying
of humans and spilling of innocent blood somehow brings the
tanar'ri power.

Ecology: When these creatures are “born,” they live a portion of
their lives in the Abyss. Those fledglings that survive on the
Abyss (an accomplishment for an immature nabassu) pass into
the Prime Material plane where they must slay humans in order
to grow and develop.

 

 
Tanar’ri, Guardian—Molydeu

 

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(a CLIMATE/TERRAIN: The Abyss
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: High to exceptional (13-16)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1
ARMOR CLASS: <5
MOVEMENT: 15
HIT DICE: 12
THACO: 9
NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-12/1-6/battle-axe (2-20 +5)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Vorpal and dancing battle-axe,
@ poison
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Affected only by cold iron weapons,
never surprised
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 90%
SIZE: H (12' tall)
MORALE: Fearless (19-20)
XP VALUE: 53,500

The molydei are an enigma in the Abyss. The only guardian
tanar’ri, these creatures are the guardians of the war effort—a
sort of political officer.

Molydei are chilling to behold. These great creatures appear as
powerful, muscular humanoids with dark red skin. In all re-
spects, they could be mistaken for giant red men, but their grue-
some heads instantly betray them. One head is that of a large,
snarling dog and is constantly alert and misses nothing that goes
on around it. The other head is that of a snake, long and prehen-
sile, often observing what goes on behind the molydeus. These
creatures carry huge, two-headed battle axes that are extremely
ornate.

Molydei have a form of ESP that enables them to communicate
with intelligent creatures and read the thoughts of others.

Combat: The molydeus is a potent fighter. They attack fearlessly,
and it is nearly unheard of for one of them to retreat from battle.
Their great axes are highly enchanted. Each one inflicts a devas-
tating 2-20 points of damage per hit and is fully +5 to attack and
damage dice. Each has the powers of a vorpal weapon and a danc-
ing sword.

Molydei also attack with both heads. The dog head will inflict
2-12 points of damage per hit. The snake head will inflict 1-6
points of damage per hit and inject a powerful venom into the vic-
tim. When injected with the poison, the victim must make a sav-
ing throw vs. poison. If he fails the save he will transform into a
manes in 1-6 turns. A neutralize poison spell followed by remove
curse will eliminate the poison. However, once turned into a
manes, the victim is irrevocably lost to any means short of divine
intervention or a very carefully worded wish.

In addition to those available to all tanar'ri, a molydeus has the
following spell-like abilities usable once per round, one at a time,
at will:

affect normal fires
animate object

blindness

charm person or mammal
command

Evard's black tentacles

*e o@ ee @

   

 

 

 

 

« fear

e improved invisibility
e know alignment
e lightning bolt, 7 times per day
e polymorph other
e sleep

® suggestion

e true seeing, always active
® vampiric touch

Molydei are ever vigilant, they are never surprised by any
means. These creatures are completely immune to attack from
most normal or magical weapons. Only cold-wrought iron weap-
ons and magical spells can affect these creatures.

When a molydeus is slain, its axe disappears. The only way of
getting one of these powerful weapons is to take one from a living
molydeus. A molydeus will not rest until it recovers its weapon,
stalking the thief day and night without end until the axe is recov-
ered and the thief horribly killed.

Habitat/Society: The molydei are the greatest enigma in the
Abyss. These powerful creatures are a sort of police. They wan-
der the layers of the Abyss and search for true tanar’ri that stray
from the cause of the Blood War. They are a political patrol that
reports directly to the balors themselves. Of course, even the
mighty balors are not above reproach and the molydei would
turn against one if it strays from the cause.

Ecology: By perpetuating the loyalty of the true tanar'ri, the mo-
lydei play an important role in the Blood War. These creatures ex-
ist only to serve the cause. They have no loyalty towards any
tanar'ri and would readily destroy any of them at the slightest
sign of infidelity. They do not attempt to enforce their doctrine on
the non-true tanar’ri for it is assumed that they are all disloyal by
nature and must be constantly threatened and punished to be
kept in line.

 

 
Tanar’ri, Least—Dretch

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: The Abyss
FREQUENCY: Common
ORGANIZATION: Group
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 2-40
ARMOR CLASS: 4
MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 2

THACO: rt)

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4/1-4/2-5
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 10%

SIZE: S (3-4' tall)
MORALE: Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 8,000

Petty and wicked, dretches are the most common of the tanar'ri.
They are found in massive hordes everywhere on the Abyss.
Along with the manes, the dretches are the rank-and-file of the
Blood War.

Dretches appear as gaunt and squat humanoids with rubbery,
almost hairless bodies. Their skin color is pale white to beige, giv-
ing way to sickly blue in some areas, stretched over pulsing vari-
cose veins. Dretches’ mouths are slack and slobbery with many
small fangs. Their hair is sparse and bristly, exposing pointed ears
that hang limply from either side of the head. A dretch’s eyes are
slanted downward and the nose appears squashed.

Dretches communicate using telepathy.

Combat: Dretches are among the weakest of the tanar'ri. Only
their vast numbers allows them to survive the many rigors of the
Abyss. Their natural attack form consists of a claw/claw/bite
routine with each claw inflicting 1-4 points of damage and their
bite inflicting 2-5 points. These creature will never flee from com-
bat if they are in the presence of a greater of true tanar'ri. Dret-
ches are lowly and wretched enough that they would rather die
than fall further into disfavor by fleeing from combat.

In addition to those available to all tanar'ri, dretches have the
following spell-like abilities useable once per round, one at a
time, at will:

® scare
e stinking cloud, 1 time per day
e telekinesis

Once per day, they may attempt to gate in 1-4 dretches with a
50% chance of success. A favorite tactic of the dretches is to gate
in 1-4 dretches and each of those attempt to gate in 1-4 dretches
until a vast and seemingly endless horde of dretches is present.

Habitat/Society: Dretches are the lowest form of “actual” tanar’ri
(the manes are merely the dead spirits from the Prime Material
plane). They will usually mill around and bring great torment to
the manes in order to avoid considering their own lowly position.

 

 

 

 

Occasionally, there is an outbreak of unrest on the Abyss. A
number of dretches revolt against their position and feel they
can—by virtue of their numbers—go their own direction and not
pay heed to the more powerful tanar’ri. This often results in a
huge outbreak of war in the Abyss that may last for as long as an
entire century. The dretches, not being strong enough to perma-
nently resist the more powerful tanar’ri, are eventually destroyed
in a great war of genocide. These civil outbreaks cause the tanar'ri
to temporarily turn their attention from the Blood War, some-
times with disastrous results.

Dretches, being a very lowly form of tanar'ri, will go either one
of two ways in their behavior. Some of these creatures simply
consider themselves so lowly that they have nothing really to
lose, and they go against the grain of the tanar'ri society, These
are the dretches that instigate civil conflicts. The others attempt
to be extremely useful and motivated, hoping to gain a promo-
tion.

Ecology: In their own right, dretches are important to the Blood
War. It has been previously noted that the primary strength of the
tanar’ri is their sheer numbers. Those numbers consist largely of
dretches. There are uncounted billions of these creatures. Unlike
the hordlings, they are “actual” tanar'ri and have some concern
for keeping their position. This fact makes them more reliable
than hordlings (that is, if the word reliable can be applied to any
creature in the Abyss).

Besides the many other obvious reasons, one of the greatest
disadvantages of being a dretch is that—like so many other lesser
fiends—their relative weakness makes them a perfect choice for
food in an environment where food is scarce. Although these
beasts exist in almost limitless numbers, they tend to be eaten in
great quantities.

 

 

 
Tanar’ri, Least—Manes

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: The Abyss
FREQUENCY: Common
ORGANIZATION: Horde
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Semi (2-4)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 50-500
ARMOR CLASS: 8
MOVEMENT: 6

HIT DICE: 1

THACO: 20

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-2/1-2/1-4 or by weapon

 

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Acidic vapor

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Immune to mind affecting spells
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 10%

SIZE: S (3' tall)

MORALE: See below

XP VALUE: 1,000

Manes are the most pathetic beings that wander the lower layers
of the Abyss. These creatures are as vast and endless as the layers
themselves.

Manes are ghastly creatures. They have pale white skin that
appears bloated and overloaded with liquids. Their eyes are a
pale white and constantly drip with puss and disgusting liquids.
Manes have long, cruel claws and sharp teeth. Their hair is sparse
and ragged and their bodies crawl with carrion creatures that lit-
erally feed upon them.

Manes cannot communicate with other beings.

Combat: Manes are nearly mindless, senseless creatures. They
shamble in seemingly endless hoards, wandering the layers of the
Abyss attacking all non-tanar'ri that they encounter. Their physi-
cal attacks consist of raking claws that inflict 1-2 points of dam-
age and their razor-sharp teeth that inflict 1-4 points of damage.

When being formed into the legions of an army, manes are of-
ten given large, mace-like weapons to use in combat. When so
armed, they inflict 1-8 points of damage per hit. One major prob-
lem with arming the manes, however, is that they quickly forget
how to use the maces and end up dropping the things and fighting
with their claws and teeth.

These creatures are without regard for their own existence.
They need never check morale for they will fight until slain. Kill-
ing a manes simply dissipates it into a noxious, stinking vapor
that reforms within 24 hours. Anyone within 10 feet of manes
when it is killed must save vs. poison or sustain 1-6 points of dam-
age from the acidic vapor.

Manes are immune to mind affecting spells.

Habitat/Society: Manes travel in hordes, and no other term
better describes their organization. They wander in large groups
sometimes numbering in the thousands. They are physically very
weak, but attack in such great numbers that all non-tanar’ri that
are in the Abyss loathe to see a horde of gibbering, snarling manes
approach.

It is very common for these wretched creatures to be formed
into vast armies by the lesser or greater tanar’ri for use in the
Blood War. They are very difficult to maintain, however, because
the manes are literally too stupid to understand what they're sup-
posed to do. They can be temporarily formed into a regiment, but
they will eventually begin to wander about aimlessly, paying no

 

 

 

 

heed to their environment or orders. If brought to a battle, how-
ever, they make excellent soldiers because once they see the en-
emy, they will attack endlessly and tirelessly, their vast numbers
giving them strength. Sometimes, though, they are known to at-
tack when such a tactic is not favorable to their army as a whole,
but that’s war in the Abyss.

In the Abyss, manes are almost not considered to be tanar’ri.
Rather, they are viewed as sub-tanar'ric and scorned by every-
thing there. Manes are not bothered by this, of course, for they
are so witless as to not even know of any structure beyond their
own existence.

Much like the dretches, the manes are important to the Blood
War. They represent a major fighting force that is considered
highly expendable. Unfortunately, the manes are unaware of
most things, including their position in the Blood War so they do
not have the means to improve the cruel and abusive treatment
they receive.

Ecology: When chaotic evil mortals from the Prime Material
plane die, their spirits go to the Abyss and become manes. Their
fate there is a terrible one, tormented by the other tanar’ri cease-
lessly.

Those who were particularly cruel and evil in life are confined
to the Pits of Despair on the 400th layer of the Abyss. Of this
place, wizards and sages know only the name, since none have
ever seen it. The pits are thought to be hidden high atop the
Mountain of Woe, but again little is known of this place. Perhaps
there are areas of the Abyss that are so terrible that mankind
should not venture there.

Another important role that the manes play in the Abyss is that
of a lowly creature at the bottom of the food chain. Manes are
plentiful and not strong enough to defend themselves against
most of the tanar’ri, so they have the dubious honor of serving as
the primary source of food in the Abyss. When a manes is eaten,
it is destroyed utterly and will not reform in 24 hours.
Tanar’ri, Least—Rutterkin

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: The Abyss
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 0
MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 4

THACO: 17

NO. OF ATTACKS: lor2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: by weapon or 2-7/2-7
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Snap-tong
SPECIAL DEFENSES: None

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 10%

SIZE: M (5-7’ tall)
MORALE: Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 12,000

The rutterkin are pathetic, malformed tanar’ri. They wander the
planes of the Abyss, outcasts in their own deranged society. Rut-
terkin are humanoid and resemble terribly ugly humans. They
are hairless or nearly so, with pointed skulls, distorted features,
and backward-pointing ears.

Rutterkin communicate using telepathy.

Combat: Rutterkin are known for the strange weapons they
carry. Some of their favorites include: a snap-tong device that in-
flicts 2-8 points upon hitting and then continues to inflict like
damage each round until the opponent breaks free by scoring a
hit on the weapon (AC 5); a polearm with a double crescent head;
a saw-toothed flatchet (broad-headed sword that is +1 damage
versus unarmored opponents); and a 3-armed blade thrown from
a sling-like device. The weapon stats are:

Weight Speed Damage
Item (Ib.) Size Type Factor S-M-L
crescent polearm 8 S 8 1-10 1-8
flatchet 3 S 4 2-8 1-6
snap-tong 5 P 8 2-8 1-4
3-armed blade 2 S 3 1-6 1-6
Range
Weapon ROF S M L
3-armed blade 3 2 4 6

If pressed, a rutterkin can also attack with its two misshapen
claws for 2-7 points of damage per strike. This method of attack is
not favored by the rutterkin because their malformed bodies are
subject to pain if they strike someone (much like the pain some-
one with a sprained wrist would feel from punching something).
Because of this, rutterkin typically groan and yelp when they at-
tack with their claws.

In addition to those available to all tanar’ri, rutterkin have the fol-
lowing spell-like abilities usable once per round, one at a time, at
will:

* fear, by touch

* telekinesis, 3 times per day

 

 

 

 

Rutterkin can gate in 1-8 least tanar’ri once per day with a 50%
chance of success.

Habitat/Society: Rutterkin are tanar'ri that have been mutated by
energies unknown. They are complete outcasts and are not even
used as cannon fodder in the Blood War.

Although rutterkin are outcasts from tanar’ri society, they do
unwittingly serve those fiends, Rutterkin are so hateful of their po-
sition that they wander the layers of the Abyss in solitude. Because
of their lowly position they will never attack any tanar'ri save for
least tanar’ri. However, they will savagely attack any non-tanar'ri
that they see in the Abyss. Although the rutterkin are usually far
too weak to stop intruders powerful enough to travel to the Abyss,
these pathetic creatures will always attempt to gate in reinforce-
ments, thereby spreading the alarm in the process.

Ecology: It appears that the rutterkin are formed directly by the
mighty nalfeshnee, using the life forces of evil but incompetent
beings that come before them for judgement. They more truly
represent chaos than their kin for they are bound to no cause,
have no society, and no master. So lowly are the rutterkin that
even the chasme pay them no heed.

There are ancient stories that point to the origin of the rut-
terkin. Some sources say that many long millennia ago, a race of
men from an obscure place in a distant corner of the Prime Mate-
rial plane began to experiment with plane and probability travel.
These cerebral beings began to explore distant places in the Prime
Material plane and eventually began to expand out into the inner
and outer planes. Their travels were of learning and recording un-
til they discovered the Abyss. When these unsuspecting beings ar-
rived at the evil, endless Abyss, they were enslaved by the tanar'ri
who—because their race was young—had never before encoun-
tered beings other than themselves. But they misused their new
slaves terribly, and their abuse changed the rutterkin into what
they are now, their ranks swelled with others foolish enough to
travel to the Abyss.

 

 

 
Tanar’ri, Lesser—Alu-Fiend

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: The Abyss

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Average to genius (8-18)

TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil (see below)

NO. APPEARING: 1-2

ARMOR CLASS: 5 base (see below)

MOVEMENT: 12, Fl 15 (D)

HIT DICE: 5

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1

DAMAGE/ATTACK: by weapon

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Possible magical weapon, spell use

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Possible magical armor, affected only
cold iron or +1 or better weapons,
intuition

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 30%

SIZE: M (5-6’ tall)

MORALE: Steady (11-12)

XP VALUE: Normal: 18,500
Genius: 40,500

Alu-fiends are the horrid female offspring of succubus and hu-
man. They are the worst combination of tanar’ri and human, evil
and hateful to the core.

These monsters look most like comely human females with at-
tractive, powerful features. Only their sharp, upsloping eye-
brows and wings give them away for what they truly are.

Alu-fiends usually communicate using telepathy, but can some-
times speak additional languages.

Combat: Alu-fiends attack with weapons, having no natural at-
tack forms save fists and teeth (which do normal human dam-
age). It is common for an alu-fiend to carry enchanted weapons;
oftentimes a gift from their evil mother. There is a 75% chance
that an alu-fiend will have an enchanted weapon. This weapon
will most likely be of common make (i.e. +1, +2, etc.), but there
is a 15% chance that it is a special weapon of some kind (ran-
domly determined). If a special weapon is possessed, the alu-fiend
will rely heavily upon it and never willingly allow any being to
take it from her.

Alu-fiends also have the power to restore their own hit points
at the expense of their opponents. This requires a normal melee
hit, which inflicts 1-8 points of damage, of which the alu-fiend
gets half (rounded up).

These creatures have a base armor class of 5. This is the heri-
tage of their unnatural mother. The base can be improved by en-
chanted armor or protective items, but not by normal armor.
However, due to the rigors of the Abyss, many alu-fiends choose
to wear armor—common or enchanted—to increase their armor
class. As with weapons, there is a 75% chance for the armor to be
enchanted (and of common make— +1, +2, etc.). If enchanted
armor is possessed, there is a 5% chance the armor is special (i.e.
plate mail of etherealness, etc.).

For both magical armor and weapons, roll on the magical item
tables, pages 139-140 of the DMG.

In addition to those available to all tanar’ri, all alu-fiends—
regardless of intelligence—have the following spell-like powers
usable one at a time, once per time, at will:

 

 

 

 

 

charm person

dimension door, 1 time per day

ESP

shape change, to a humanoid form of approximately their
own height and weight only

* suggestion

All alu-fiends have infravision out to 240 feet. Alu-fiends are
affected only by cold-wrought iron or magical weapons. They
have an innate intuitional sense that warns them of impending
danger 75% of the time.

Fully 10% of alu-fiends are of genius intelligence. While genius
alu-fiends have all the spell-like powers of their less intelligent sis-
ters, they are also actual mages. Genius alu-fiends are Ist to 12th
level mages, with full spell ability, and can choose spells from any
school. Genius alu-fiends will never be specialist wizards.

Habitat/Society: Alu-fiends tend to be very hateful (even by
tanar'ri standards) because of their “half” or dual nature. They
view themselves as outcasts, neither human or tanar'ri.

The fact of the matter is that the tanar’ri view them the same
way. They are seen as lowly and without purpose. It is only the
fairly powerful nature of the alu-fiends that keeps them in conten-
tion as a lesser tanar'ri race.

Ecology: Most alu-fiends are very human in appearance. If they
wear something to hide their wings, they will be mistaken for a
human 70% of the time.

Interestingly enough, 20% of alu-fiends are not totally dedi-
cated to evil. This usually occurs when a succubus mates with a
nonevil human. The offspring may retain just a piece of her fa-
ther’s morality. These monsters will tend to be chaotic neutral or
true neutral in alignment.
Tanar’ri, Lesser—Bar-lgura

MCs

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: The Abyss
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Pack
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low to average (5-10)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 2-12
ARMOR CLASS: 0
MOVEMENT: 9, Climb 15
HIT DICE: 6+6
THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6/1-6/2-12
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spring attack
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Camouflage
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 30%

SIZE: M (5’ tall)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 25,500

The bar-lgura are hulking, brutish creatures that roam the Abyss
in small packs. They sometimes serve as scouts for armies in the
Blood War.

Bar-lgura look like large orangutans. Their fur is a deep, red-
dish brown and their skin—where exposed—is grayish brown in
color. They have gruesome visages and are frightening to behold.
Bar-lgura have six digits per hand and foot with sharp, wicked
claws extending from each. These creatures shamble along the
ground using both arms and legs for movement, but prefer to
move among things like trees, rafters, vines, etc., for they have
increased movement there.

Bar-lgura communicate using telepathy.

Combat: Bar-lgura favor guerilla tactics and will often lay in wait
for opponents, springing forth from cover at the last moment.
The beasts can spring up to 40 feet in a leap and attack in the same
round.

Bar-lgura are savage creatures and willingly fight most any-
thing that comes along. They will attack in numbers, often trying
to overwhelm a single unfortunate opponent. Their claws inflict
1-6 points of damage per strike and their bite inflicts 2-12.

In addition to those available to all tanar’ri, the bar-lgura have
the following spell-like powers, at 6th-level of spell use, that they
can use one at a time, once per round, at will:

change self, 2 times per day
detect invisibility

dispel magic

entangle

fear, by touch

invisibility, 2 times per day
plant growth

spectral force, 2 times per day
telekinesis

ss #8 @t#ee#eeeee

They may also attempt to gate in 1-6 additional bar-lgura with
a 35% chance of success.

 

Ais ai?

 

 

 

These creatures are experts of camouflage. They may change
their coloration to that of their surroundings much as a chame-
leon does. The transformation requires one complete round and
acts as a thief’s hide in shadows 95%.

Habitat/Society: Bar-lgura dislike all other tanar'ri and prefer to
hunt and terrorize only among their own kind. They usually do
not associate with other types of tanar'ri, obeying only those of
obviously greater power than themselves.

Bar-lgura do, however, act as scouting groups for the Blood
War when commanded. They do this without question because
they fear the power of the true tanar’ri who will punish them if
they do not comply.

In certain areas of the Abyss, the bar-lgura form societies of
300 or more creatures. These societies divorce themselves from
the day to day dealings of the Abyss and form their own crude
“government”. It is the only equivalent of a government found on
the Abyss. When in such a society, bar-lgura will not obey any
other tanar’ri, for they feel their numbers will protect them from
the wrath of the true tanar'ri. This is often the case, but still there
are tales of a balor summarily laying waste to an entire society of
these rebellious bar-lgura.

Ecology: Bar-lgura are beasts and not terribly intelligent. They do
not have the same hatred of the baatezu that other tanar’ri feel.
They are the closest thing to animals among the tanar'ri and are
given especially cruel treatment by the more powerful tanar'ri
when they are thought to be out of line.

 

 

 

 
Tanar’ri, Lesser—Cambion

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Major Baron/Marquis
CLIMATE/TERRAIN: The Abyss The Abyss
FREQUENCY: Very rare Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any Any
DIET: Carnivore Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average to High to genius
exceptional (9-16) (13-18)
TREASURE: R, C Z,A
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil Chaotic evil
(see below) (see below)
NO. APPEARING: 1 1
ARMOR CLASS: 6 2
MOVEMENT: 15 15
HIT DICE: 4 6
THACO: 17 15
NO. OF ATTACKS: 2 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: by weapon by weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below See below
SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below See below
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 30% 30%
SIZE: M (6-7’ tall) M (6-7' tall)
MORALE: Elite (13-14) Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE; 13,500-17,500 16,500-23,500

In the event that a tanar’ri mates with a human female the result-
ing offspring is always a cambion. The type of cambion so sired
depends on its parentage. If a lesser or greater tanar’ri mates with
a human female, a major cambion will be born. If the father was a
true tanar'ri, the offspring will be a baron/marquis. In either
case, the mother does not survive the birth.

Cambions are ugly and terrifying. They are humanoid, but
have pitch black skin that is covered with pockmarks and is
slightly scaly. Their ears are sharply pointed and their mouths are
filled with crooked, sickly fangs. These creatures often adorn
themselves with spiked armor and weapons.

Cambions have ability scores much like a PC or NPC. The
range is determined by the type of cambion and is detailed below:

Male Parentage Class

Major Baron/Marquis
Strength 17-18" 18-20**
Dexterity 13-18 15-20
Constitution 13-18 15-18
Intelligence 9-16 13-18
Wisdom 5-8 13-18
Charisma 1-6 2-24"**

* Roll 1d4: 1=17, 2=18, 3=18/50, 4= 18/00

** Roll 1d6: 1=18, 2718/25, 3= 18/50, 4=18/00, 5=19,
6=20

*** Scores over 18 indicate the cambion is considered charm-

ing. Charming cambion can, at will, produce a reaction identi-

cal to a charm person spell.

Cambions communicate using telepathy.

Combat: Cambions tend to use ornate weapons and armor. They
are 75% likely to have a magical weapon. It will most likely be of
common make (i.e. +1, +2, etc.), but they are 15% likely to
have a special magical weapon. The special weapon should be
randomly determined.

These tanar’ric offspring are also likely to possess magical ar-

 

 

 

 

 

mor. A cambion is 75% likely to have magical armor. It will most
likely be of common make (i.e. +1, +2, etc.), but they are 15%
likely to have special armor, also determined randomly.

In addition to those available to all tanar'ri, cambions have 1 to
4 of the following spell-like powers:

* detect magic

* fear, by touch

* levitate, 7 times per day

* polymorph self, 3 times per day

Cambions have keen senses are thus never surprised. Each is
normally very stealthy; they can climb walls 95%, hide in
shadows 80%, and move silently 80%. They may perform these
actions in bulky metal armor without penalty.

Any cambion with 16 or higher intelligence will have mage
abilities. They can act as mages of a level equal to their hit dice
(cambion majors 4th level, cambion baron/marquis 6th level)
and will have a randomly determined spell-book.

Habitat/Society: Cambions, much like alu-fiends (q.v.), are
freaks and outcasts. They are never accepted in human society
and are only poorly tolerated in tanar’ri society. This has caused
them to be very bitter (even by tanar’ri standards) and hateful to-
wards all things.

However, their stealth and detachment make them excellent as-
sassins. They are often used directly by the balors as personal
bodyguards and advisors. A cambion will take great pride in
serving so high a power in the Abyss.

On rare occasions, a cambion will not be chaotic evil, but will
neutral or good. There is but a 10% chance of this phenomenon
occurring and only when their tanar’ric father mates with a hu-
man female of good alignment, These wretched creatures are
doomed to an existence of misery since they will rarely, if ever, be
accepted by a good aligned community. They normally end up
being lone wolves.

Ecology: Evil cambions serve in the Blood War as assassins.

 
Tanar’ri, Lesser—Succubus

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: The Abyss

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (15-16)

TREASURE: I,Q

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 0

MOVEMENT: 12, Fl 18 (C)

HIT DICE: 6

THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-3/1-3

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Energy drain

SPECIAL DEFENSES: +2 or better weapons to hit, immune
to fire, never surprised

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 30%

SIZE: M (6’ tall)

MORALE: Elite (13-14)

XP VALUE: 29,000

Beautiful and seductive, the succubi are the temptresses of mor-
tals. While the glabrezu (q.v.) are the subtle tempters of men of
power, the succubi are temptresses of men of passion and energy.

Succubi appear most often in polymorphed form, that of stun-
ningly beautiful women with perfect figures and smooth, milky
skin. In this form, succubi are as different in appearance to one
another as mortal woman are. They all share one thing with each
other, though: uncommon loveliness. They may also appear as
any demihuman race to tempt members of it. However, they do
not often deal with demihumans because the fiery nature of hu-
mans makes them easier prey.

Succubi have the ability to appear more tanar’ric in their true
form: that of a beautiful woman with large wings and sinister,
glowing eyes.

Succubi are capable of speaking the language of their victims.
They can also communicate using telepathy.

Combat: Succubi are not warriors by any means. When pressed,
they are capable of defending themselves, but will always choose
to flee when possible.

They may attack with their fists that inflict but 1-3 points of
damage per hit.

The kiss of a succubi will energy drain their victim, causing
him to lose one life level. A common tactic of the succubi is to
lure mortal men into activities of passion and then drain the life
from them. Even after being drained by the succubi once, the
heat of the moment is so strong that most men will not notice
they have been drained. Any man engaged in amorous activities
with a succubi must make a wisdom check with a —4 penalty
each time he is drained. If he fails the check, he will continue
heedless of the danger.

In addition to those available to all tanar’ri, succubi also have
the following spell-like powers, usable once per round, one at a
time, at will:

* become ethereal, as if using oil of etherealness
* charm person

* clairaudience

° ESP

* plane shift

 

 

=]

r

 

* shape change, to a humanoid form of approximately their
own height and weight only
* suggestion

They may also attempt to gate in a single balor once per day
with a 40% chance of success.

Succubi are affected only by +2 or better weapons. They are
immune to all fire-based attacks, magical or otherwise. They are
never surprised.

Habitat/Society: The temptresses of the lower planes are subtle
and slow. It is their way to cause mortals to succumb to their
charms and beauty, ultimately bringing about the mortals’
deaths. They often have passionate encounters with mortal men,
only to later destroy them and take their life forces to the Abyss.

Succubi act independently of the tanar'ri society. They seem to
work of their own volition and are ultimately answerable to no
one. The greater and true tanar'ri seem to be content with this sit-
uation, for those powerful creatures do not act to stop the suc-
cubi.

Ecology: It could be argued that the destruction of mortals leads
directly to power gained in the Abyss. With this the succubi aid
the eternal war effort of the tanar'ri and are, therefore, tolerated.

Incubus

Incubi are the male counterparts to succubi, but are far less com-
mon, These creatures are male and travel to the Prime Material
plane to tempt female mortals. These creatures always appear as
the most perfect male specimen of the whatever race they are
tempting. However, succubi and incubi do not mate to perpetuate
their kind. That process is a mystery.

It is uncertain why there are more succubi than incubi. Sages
suggest that it is because mortal men are far more susceptible to
the temptations of beauty than are women.

 

 

 
Tanar’ri, True—Balor

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: The Abyss

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Supra-genius (19-20)

TREASURE: Hx3

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil

NO, APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: -8

MOVEMENT: 15, Fl 36 (B)

HIT DICE: 13

THACO: 7

NO. OF ATTACKS: lor2

DAMAGE/ATTACK: by weapon or 2-12

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Terror, body flames, death throes
explosion

SPECIAL DEFENSES: +3 or better weapons to hit

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 70%

SIZE: L (12' tall)

MORALE: Fanatic (17-18)

XP VALUE: 46,000

The greatest and most terrible of the true tanar’ri, the balors are
the undisputed terrors of the Abyss. They are the very motiva-
tion behind the tanar’ri involvement of the Blood War. In every
sense of the word, balors are the quintessential tanar’ri. They de-
rive great pleasure from the suffering of others and will go out of
their way to torment lesser beings and cause them pain.

Balors are repulsive and loathsome to behold. They are tower-
ing humanoids with deep, dark red skin. They have huge wings
that propel them with unnatural speed and agility. They have
long, wicked claws and grotesque fangs that drip with venom.
Balors commonly carry great swords of lightning and are sur-
rounded by searing flames.

Balors communicate using telepathy.

Combat: Balors can attack with their great fists for 2-12 points of
damage. Anyone so struck by the fists of a balor must make a
saving throw vs. spells with a —6 penalty or flee in terror for 1-6
turns.

Balors much prefer their weapons to their fists in combat. Each
carries a great sword that looks like a bolt of lightning. In the
hands of the balor, these swords are vorpal and can detect evil/
good in a 30’ radius. Any creature that picks up a balor’s sword,
regardless if their skin actually touches it, will immediately suffer
10-60 points of damage and must make a saving throw vs. spells
or die immediately.

Balors also use a great whip with many “tails.” These whips will
inflict but 1-4 points of damage per hit. However, they magically
wrap around the victim, allowing the balor to draw the victim
into his everpresent bodily flames. Once dragged into the flames,
the victim suffers 4-24 points of damage per round. Escaping the
whip requires a successful one-half strength check. While one vic-
tim is held in the whip, it cannot be used in other attacks.

In addition to those available to all tanar’ri, balors may use the
following spell-like powers, at an impressive 20th-level of spell
use, one at a time, once per round, at will:

detect invisibility, always active
detect magic, always active
dispel magic

fear

pyrotechnics

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

read magic
suggestion
symbol, any type
telekinesis
tongues

They may also gate 1-8 least, 1-6 lesser, 1-4 greater, or 1 true
tanar'ri to their location. The gate will always be successful but
may only be used one time per hour.

Balors are immune to all nonmagical attacks including non-
magical fire, gas, poison, and weapons. If a balor is slain in the
Abyss, it explodes in a blinding flash of light, inflicting 50 points
of damage to everything in a 100 foot radius around the creature
(saving throw vs. spell for half damage).

oe 6 6 6

Habitat/Society: Balors exist for one purpose only: to wage the
Blood War. They are driven by the strongest primal desire to fight
and will command whole legions of beings into battle.

Balors also recognize a subtle but important aspect of the War:
the Prime Material plane. They will often make pacts with mor-
tals to perform services for the purpose of gaining power in the
Prime Material plane. Balors know that the more followers or al-
lies they can gain in the Prime Material plane, the more power
they have there.

There are at least 24 balors known to exist. The creature do not
inhabit any particular area of the Abyss, but rather wander about
forming armies for battle with the baatezu (q.v.).

Ecology: Certainly there is nothing more important in the Abyss
than the Blood War. The balor, in a sense, are the Blood War from
a tanar'ri perspective. In that sense, they are the ecology of the
Abyss, driving the creation of new beings and mandating their
survival.

 
Tanar’ri, True—Glabrezu

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: The Abyss
FREQUENCY: Rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Exceptional (15-16)
TREASURE: H (see below)
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: —7

MOVEMENT: 15

HIT DICE: 10

THACO: 11

NO. OF ATTACKS: 5
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-12/2-12/1-3/1-3/2-5
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Grab

SPECIAL DEFENSES: +2 or better weapons to hit
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 50%

SIZE: H (15’ tall)
MORALE: Fanatic (17-18)

XP VALUE: 44,000

Glabrezu are the true tanar'ri that typically respond to summon-
ings from the Prime. They are agents that go forth and attempt to
secure power on the Prime Material plane for their cause.

Glabrezu are towering, broad and well-muscled, with four
arms, two of which end in hands with wicked claws, two of which
end in large and powerful pincers. They have dog-like heads with
snarling fangs. Their skin color ranges from a deep russet to pitch
black. They have penetrating violet eyes. These giant, command-
ing tanar’ri are terrifying to look upon.

Glabrezu communicate using telepathy.

Combat: Glabrezu will usually not fight when dealing with mor-
tals in the Prime Material plane. They prefer to use guile and
trickery. A glabrezu very much enjoys coercing a mortal into an
evil bargain through negotiations and deception. However, if
things do not go as planned, the glabrezu will think nothing of
slaying the mortal who, to the glabrezu’s thinking, would proba-
bly end up in the Abyss anyway.

When necessary, a glabrezu can attack with a claw/claw/
pincer/pincer/bite routine. The claws will each inflict 1-3 points
of damage per hit, the powerful pincers each inflict 2-12 points of
damage, and the bite inflicts 2-5 points.

When attacking an opponent that weighs 150 pounds or less, a
glabrezu can attempt to grab the victim and pick him up off the
ground. Victims struck by a claw must make a dexterity check.
Failure means that the glabrezu has picked him up off the ground.
The opponent will most likely be picked up by the waist, so he
can still attack normally but at a —4 penalty on his attack. A
grabbed victim may only break free upon making a half strength
check in a round in which he is not otherwise attacking. A gla-
brezu will rarely drop an opponent once he is grabbed unless the
tanar’ri is about to die.

In addition to those available to all tanar'ri, glabrezu can use
the following spell like powers, at 10th-level of spell use, one at a
time, once per round, at will:

* burning hands

® charm person

* confusion

© detect magic, always active
© dispel magic

* enlarge

 

 

 

 

 

* mirror image

* power word, stun, 7 times per day
© reverse gravity

* true seeing, always active

Glabrezu can gate in one true tanar'ri with 50% chance of suc-
cess. This can be done once per day.

These creatures are immune to all nonmagical attacks like fire,
gas, acid, etc. They are unaffected by weapons of less than +2
magical enchantment.

Due to their role in true tanar'ri society, glabrezu can plane
shift at will. They will rarely do this of their own volition, how-
ever, preferring to go to the Prime only when summoned.

Habitat/Society: Glabrezu are the covert agents of the under-
world. It is their job to lure the weak mortals into giving them
power. When a mortal mage summons a glabrezu the mage be-
lieves it is he that is gaining power by the casting. The spell caster
is confident that if his magic is strong, he will be the master of the
situation. Nothing could be further from the truth, however, be-
cause mortal mages are short-sighted compared to the immortal
glabrezu. The glabrezu knows that with each casting, with each
summoning, its power there—like a seed of evil—is fertilized and
begins to germinate.

Glabrezu possess a great deal of treasure that they hoard in vast
subterranean lairs in the Abyss. These masses of gold, magic, and
other wealth are used to tempt mortals and lure them into sum-
moning the glabrezu more often.

Ecology: Unlike the writhing masses and hordes of chaos that in-
habit the Abyss, the true tanar’ri are the masters of tanar’ri des-
tiny. In that society, the glabrezu are an elite. They are leeching
power from the Prime Material plane and exerting their influence
there with surgical precision. Although they generally do not take
a part in the wholesale slaughter and warfare that the rest of
tanar'ri society engages in, their subtle manipulations and subju-
gations are a deeper form of evil.

 

 
Tanar’ri, True—Hezrou

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: The Abyss

FREQUENCY: Common

ORGANIZATION: Group

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Average to high (8-14)

TREASURE: C

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil

NO. APPEARING: 1-6

ARMOR CLASS: -6

MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 9

THACO: 11

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3

DAMAGFE/ATTACK: 1-6/1-6/4-16

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Bear hug, stench

SPECIAL DEFENSES: +2 or better weapons to hit, half
damage from other nonmagical,
never surprised

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 70%

SIZE: L(7+' tall)

MORALE: Fanatic (17-18)

XP VALUE: 39,000

The hezrou are one of the least powerful of the true tanar’ri, but
they are still creatures of formidable power. They perform the
will of the nalfeshnee and are often seen wandering the layers of
the Abyss, usually overseeing the formation of armies.

Hezrou appear as large toads with arms in place of forearms.
They are roughly humanoid, comfortably standing upright or on
all four limbs at will. They have rows of blunt, powerful teeth
and spines running the length of their back.

Hezrou communicate using telepathy.

Combat: Hezrou are foul tempered and mean. They often attack
even those that follow their instructions just for the sheer enter-
tainment of it. Their claw attacks inflict 1-6 points of damage per
successful hit. Their blunt, crushing teeth inflict 4-16 points per

oe successful bite.

If both claw attacks successfully hit a target in the same round,
they victim is in a powerful bear hug and cannot attack. The
crushing of the hug will inflict 2-8 points of damage per round and
the hezrou’s bite attacks will automatically hit. A successful one-
half strength check is required to break free of the hug. A hezrou
will release its victim if it itself sustains 20 points of damage or
more in one round.

The amphibious, frog-like skin of a hezrou emits a foul liquid
that coats its skin at all times. Anyone within 10 feet of the crea-
ture must make a saving throw vs. paralyzation or be overcome
by the powerful stench of the creature. Anyone so overcome will
be unable to attack, helpless on the ground, gagging and vomit-
ing. Those that do successfully make their saving throw are still at
a —2 penalty to their attack and initiative dice.

In addition to those available to all tanar’ri, hezrou have the
following spell-like powers, at 9th-level of spell use, usable one at
a time, once per round, at will:

* animate object

blink

* duo-dimension, 3 times per day

® produce flame

® protection from normal missiles

® summon insects

e unholy word, reverse of holy word

 

 

 

© wall of fire

They may, three times per day, attempt to gate in 4-40 least, 1-
10 lesser, or 1-4 greater tanar’ri with a 50% chance of success.
Once per day, they may attempt to gate in 1 true tanar'ri with a
20% chance of success.

Hezrou are immune to attacks from nonmagical weapons and
take but half damage from all nonmagical attack forms (such as
fire, poison, acid, etc.). They are impossible to surprise. Hezrou
have infravision extending out to 120’ and have double human
normal auditory and olfactory senses.

Habitat/Society: Hezrou are the “long arm” of the imperious
nalfeshnee. They are charged with walking among the layers of
the Abyss and enforcing the directions of the higher true tanar'ri.
Due to the extremely chaotic nature of the inhabitants of the
Abyss, the hezrou’s services are very often needed.

During certain times of a century, the hezrou are given the abil-
ity to plane shift at will. At these times of the Dark Walk, as they
are known, the hezrou go forth and make pacts with mortals.
They will willingly enter into service for a mortal—typically one
in dire need—but exact a heavy toll. They will typically secure
the eternal subservience of the mortal or someone close to him (a
family member, friend, etc.) in exchange for a great service such
as destroying an enemy’s castle, retrieving a lost artifact, or some
other accomplishment of that nature. These victims come to the
Abyss and their tragic fate is to serve as manes (q.v).

Ecology:As a form of true tanar'ri, the hezrou are integral to the
Blood War. They are literally the enforcers of the will of the true
tanar’ri. In this respect, they are often spared the certain death of
front line duty in the war.

Hezrou are less advanced than the other true tanar’ri. They are
not as intelligent nor as intuitive as the great rulers of the Abyss.
This is ideal to their duties, however, for theirs is to obey and en-
force.

 
Tanar’ri, True—Marilith

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: = The Abyss

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Genius (17-18)

TREASURE: Orr

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil

NO. APPEARING: 1-2

ARMOR CLASS: -9

MOVEMENT: 15

HIT DICE: 12

THACO: a

NO. OF ATTACKS: y

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 4-24 and 6 by weapon
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Magical weapons, constriction
SPECIAL DEFENSES: +2 or better weapons to hit, never

surprised, spell immunity
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 70%

 

SIZE: L (7' tall)
MORALE: Fanatic (17-18)
XP VALUE: 45,000

Bold and cunning, mariliths are the generals and tacticians for the
Blood War. Where the balors are the influence and energy behind
the war effort, the mariliths are the brains and tactics.

Terrible to behold, these creatures appear as half snake, half
humanoid. From the waist down, these creatures have the bodies
of giant snakes, with huge, green, scaly coils. From the waist up,
they are beautiful, comely females. Besides the obvious snake
body, the feature that gives away the true nature of this tanar'ri is
her six arms. They are commonly adorned with precious jewelry
and highly decorated weapons—they most often carry a different
weapon in each of their six hands.

Mariliths communicate using telepathy.

Combat: Although mariliths are strategists and tacticians, they
love to enter combat and will do so whenever the opportunity
presents itself. They can attack with each of their six arms and
constrict a victim with their snaky tails, as well.

Mariliths will always carry a different weapon in each hand,
favoring exotic swords and axes. The DM should assign specific
weapons; 90% of them should be enchanted of the common the
variety, and 15% of those should be a special weapon. Marilith
favor their weapons greatly. If one should ever be lost or stolen,
they will go to great lengths to see that the weapon is recovered.

A marilith can also constrict with her deadly tail. If the tail hits
in combat, it wraps around a victim to crush the life out of him.
The tail does 4-24 points of crushing damage plus constricts the
air from a victim. Once constricted, the victim automatically
takes 4-24 points of damage per round. Additionally, due to the
constriction of air, he must make a constitution check every
round or fall unconscious. No opponent with less than a 15
strength can even hope to break free of the tanar’ri’s coils. There is
a 10% chance per round per point of strength over 14 that he can
escape.

In addition to those available to all tanar’ri, mariliths have the
following spell-like powers that they can use once per round, one
at a time, at will:

® animate dead
® cause serious wounds, reverse of cure serious wounds

* cloudkill
* comprehend languages

 

 

 

 

 

curse, reverse of bless

detect evil

detect magic

detect invisibility

e polymorph self, 7 times per day
® project image

* pyrotechnics

© telekinesis

They may also attempt to gate in 2-20 least tanar'ri, 1-6 lesser
tanar'ri, 1-4 greater tanar'ri, or 1 true tanar’ri once per hour with
a 35% chance of success.

Weapons of +1 or lesser magical enchantment cannot harm a
marilith. These creatures are never surprised. They cannot be
fooled by illusions and are immune to mind affecting spells.

Habitat/Society: As noted, mariliths are the strategists of the
Blood War. They are in charge of devising all tactics to be used
during the battles and coordinate the activities of all true tanar'ri
(save the mighty balors, of course). Due to the chaotic nature of
the non-true tanar’ri, it is not really possible to coordinate their
activities, but the mariliths are charged with it nevertheless.

These stunningly powerful creatures have a hatred for the gla-
brezu. They feel that the subtle warfare of the glabrezu is a chil-
drens’ game and inferior to proper warfare. A marilith will
attempt to discredit the workings of the glabrezu any chance they
get. They would completely destroy the subtle beasts, but the all-
powerful balors favor the glabrezus’ tactics and would have them
continue their ways.

Ecology: Mariliths are true tanar’ri, which makes them a part of
the driving force behind the Blood War. Moreover, they are the
coordinators and generals of the war efforts. Mariliths feel that
they are the true force behind the war. Secretly, they feel that the
balors have their place only because of their great power but are
not absolutely necessary. They may be right in their belief, but
the power of the balors remains unchallenged.

 

 
Tanar’ri, True—Nalfeshnee

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

@aumr E/TERRAIN: The Abyss
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any
DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Godlike (21 +)
TREASURE: Hx 2
ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil
NO. APPEARING: 1
ARMOR CLASS: -8
MOVEMENT: 12, Fl 15 (D)
HIT DICE: 11
THACO: 9
NO. OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4/1-4/2-8
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Magical spray

i SPECIAL DEFENSES: Never surprised, affected only cold

iron or +2 or better weapons
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 70%

 

SIZE: H (20' tall)
MORALE: Fanatic (17-18)
XP VALUE; 43,500

For mortals, there is no being more terrifying than the nalfeshnee.
These creatures are punishers. Those that pass into the Abyss will
eventually come before one of these beings, to suffer judgement
and the pain of transformation.

Nalfeshnee are towering creatures, broad and strong. They

e combine the worst features of an ape and a boar, and their small

wings appear unable to bear their ponderously huge bodies.
Nalfeshnee have red, glowing eyes that pierce the mind and seem
to draw energy from just a glance.

Nalfeshnee communicate using telepathy.

Combat: Though the nalfeshnee usually sit atop their thrones and

judge the masses of mortal lives in the Abyss, they are quite capa-

ble of battle. Their physical attacks consist of a claw/claw/bite

routine with the claw attacks inflicting 1-4 points of damage and
& the bite 2-8. These are rarely used.

Nalfeshnee have a special attack that in some ways resembles
the spell color spray. Three times per day, they may concentrate
their power into an energy attack. In order to perform the attack,
they must concentrate for an entire melee round (although suc-
cessful hits on the creature during that round will not cause it to
break concentration). After concentration, the nalfeshnee re-
leases energy in the from of multiple, rainbow-colored beams that
shoot in every direction. All creatures within 50 feet of the
nalfeshnee will suffer 15 points of damage immediately (saving
throw vs. spells for half damage). They must then make a saving
throw vs. spells with a —2 penalty. Failure means they are tempo-
rarily stricken dumb and will wander around randomly in a
trance-like state for 1-10 rounds.

In addition to those available to all tanar'ri, these powerful
creatures have the following spell-like powers usable once per
round, one at a time, at will:

alter self

bind

call lightning

chill touch

detect invisibility, always active
distance distortion

ESP, always active

feeblemind

ee @e@#eeeess

 

 

 

 

 

* forget

® giant insect
* invisibility
e know alignment, always active
® mirror image
* protection from good, always active
® raise dead
« slow
« web

Nalfeshnee may also attempt to gate in 1-6 babaus or 1 vrock,
twice per day, with a 50% chance of success.

Nalfeshnee are never surprised. They are immune to non-
magical weapons, save those made from cold-wrought iron.
They may communicate with any being using a powerful form of
telepathy.

Habitat/Society: Nalfeshnee are the most intelligent of the
tanar’ri. Because of this, they consider themselves to be superior
even to the mighty balors. Nalfeshnee will not act on this feeling
nor voice it to another because they realize the balors have
greater combat powers than they. A nalfeshnee will not, how-
ever, pass up an opportunity to secretly trip up the plans of these
mighty beings, embarrassing the balor and perpetuating the
Blood War.

The nalfeshnee primarily occupy the 400th layer of the Abyss
where they sit on mighty thrones of flame in the Mountain of
Woe. From these thrones they cast judgement upon the mortal life
forces that pass into the Abyss. They are also known as lords of
woe,

Ecology: Nalfeshnee are dark creatures of evil. They feed upon ha-
tred and despair, emotions they can draw out of any being they see.
They draw these feelings from the life forces they judge, devouring
their emotions, leaving an empty husk of useless thoughts. These
husks are then transformed into other forms of tanar’ri in ceremo-
nies involving centuries of unimaginable torture.
Tanar’ri, True—Vrock

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: The Abyss

FREQUENCY: Uncommon

ORGANIZATION: Group

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore

INTELLIGENCE: High (13-14)

TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic evil

NO. APPEARING: 2-8

ARMOR CLASS: —§

MOVEMENT: 12, Fl 18 (C)

HIT DICE: 8

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 5

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4/1-4/1-8/1-8/1-6 +7 (strength
bonus)

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spores, screech, first attack, dance of
ruin

SPECIAL DEFENSES: +2 or better weapons to hit, never
surprised

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 70%

SIZE: L (8' tall)

MORALE: Fanatic (17-18)

XP VALUE: 37,000

The vrock are the weakest of the true tanar'ri and serve as elite
fighting troops in the Blood War. Vrock look like a cross between
a large human and a vulture. The creatures have strong, sinewy
limbs covered with fine, gray feathers, They have long, unseemly
necks and terrible vulture heads. The wicked claws and beak of
the vrock are obvious weapons.

Vrock communicate using telepathy.

Combat: Vicious fighters, the vrocks can attack a devastating five
time in a single melee round. Because of their dexterity and ex-
treme battle prowess, vrocks may direct each of these attacks
against different opponents. Their hand claw attacks each inflict
1-8 points of damage. Their beaks inflict 1-6 points of damage per
successful hit. Vrocks may also attack with their foot claws, in-
flicting but 1-4 points of damage because the vrock is off balance
when attacking this way.

The vrocks also attack with a stinging ejection of spores from
small glands about the creatures’ bodies. They may attack once
every three melee rounds with a spore attack. By ejecting a spray
of spores from multiple glands, a vrock is able to affect all oppo-
nents within 5 feet of it. Anyone in the radius of the spores will
automatically take 1-8 points of damage from them. Once the
spores have hit, they implant themselves just below the surface of
the skin and begin to grow and sprout. Victims will suffer 1-2
points of damage per round from spore growth. The spores will
continue to grow for 10 melee rounds at which time the victim is
covered with thick, vine-like growths. The spores can be killed by
a bless, neutralize poison, or similar spell or by being sprinkled
with holy water. Slow poison will stop the growth.

Once per battle, a vrock can emit a loud, deafening screech.
This screech affects everyone within 30 feet. They will usually
save their screech for emergencies and will typically use when
near death, screeching just before they teleport away. A saving
throw vs. spell negates this.

In addition to those available to all tanar’ri, vrocks have the
following spell-like powers, at 10th-level of spell use, usable once
per round, one at a time, at will:

© detect invisibility

e detect magic

 

 

 

 

 

e dispel magic
® mass charm

® mirror image
« telekinesis

They may also attempt to gate in 2-20 manes, 1-6 bar-lgura, or
1 nalfeshnee. This may only be attempted once per day, and there
is a 50% chance of success.

Vrocks are completely immune to attacks from nonmagical
weapons. These creatures are never surprised and will always at-
tack first in the melee round. Vrocks have a 19 strength gain all
attack and damage benefits from it (+7 damage adjustment).
They have infravision that extends out to 120’.

When five or more vrocks are fighting together in a battle, they
may attempt a special power called dance of ruin. The vrocks
simply join hands and form a circle. They then begin to dance
wildly in a circle, each one screeching and chanting in ancient lan-
guages. After three melee rounds of this, a weave of energy will
be created that crackles and scintillates in the air like lightning.
Anyone within 100 feet of the dance of ruin must make a saving
throw vs. death magic or suffer 2-40 points of damage (make a
saving throw vs. spells for half damage). If any of the vrock take
20 or more points of damage during the three melee rounds, the
dance is disrupted and must be started again. All creatures, in-
cluding the vrock, are affected.

Habitat/Society: Vrocks play a very direct and important role in
tanar’ri society. They are an elite fighting force used in important
battles and combat situations. They are often sent on missions
such as infiltration and other covert missions.

Ecology: Vrocks have no known ecological niche, save for the
fact that they eat their fallen foes after combat. They are simply
powerful fighting machines from birth. Vrocks are very loyal to
their own. They travel in groups of up to eight (more when enter-
ing battle) and fight in coordination with each other with perfect
timing and synchronicity.

 

 

 
Titan

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Olympus

FREQUENCY: Uncommon

ORGANIZATION: Group

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Supra-genius to godlike (19-21 +)

TREASURE; E, Q (*10), R

ALIGNMENT: Chaotic good

NO. APPEARING: 1-10

ARMOR CLASS: 0

MOVEMENT: 36

HIT DICE; 20

THACO: 5

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 7-42 (7d6) weapon +14 (strength
bonus)

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 50%

SIZE: G (25 +’ tall)

MORALE; Fanatic (17-18)

XP VALUE: 70,000 (see below)

Titans are gargantuan, almost godlike men and woman. They,
quite simply, look like 25' tall people of great physical strength
and beauty. They are commonly dressed in traditional Greek
garb, favoring togas, loincloths, and such. They wear rare and
valuable jewelry and in other ways make themselves seem beauti-
ful and overpowering.

In addition to speaking their own language, titans are able to
speak the six main dialects of giants. All titans are also conversant
in the common tongue as well as that commonly spoken by forest
creatures, as these giants have close ties with nature.

Combat: The basic attack of titans is their great maul (maul of the
titans), These monstrous beings are capable of attacking twice in
a melee round and inflicting 7-42 points of damage per hit.

Titans may choose to make a single other attack in a round.
This form of special attack is so destructive and deadly, that a ti-
tan will use it only if there are no other options left open. The
form of each titan’s attack will be different (some kick, some
punch, others use a breath attack, lightning, etc.), but the effect is
the same for each. The special attack inflicts 10-60 points of dam-
age per hit and can be used every other round. These mighty at-
tacks have been known to destroy buildings and sink ships.

Titans can become ethereal twice per day. All titans are able to
employ both mage or priest spells (dependent on the individual
titan—only one, not both) as a 20th-level spell caster. In addition,
all titans have the following spell-like powers, at 20th level of
spell use, usable once per round, one at a time, at will:

advanced illusion
alter self

animal summoning II
astral spell

bless

charm person or mammal
commune with nature
cure light wounds
evyebite

fire storm

hold person

hold monster

hold undead

 

 

 

 

 

invisibility
levitate

light

mirror image
pass without trace
produce fire
protection from evil, 10' radius
remove fear
remove curse
shield

speak with plants
summon insects
whispering wind

ee @eeeseebrbkhee#eesese«

Titans are not affected by attacks from nonmagical weapons.

Habitat/Society: Titans are livers of life, creators of fate. These
benevolent giants are closer to the well springs of life than mere
mortals and, as such, revel in their gigantic existences. Titans are
wild and chaotic, They are prone to more pronounced emotions
that humans and can experience godlike fits of rage. They are,
however, basically good and benevolent, so they tend not to take
life. They are very powerful creatures and will fight with ferocity
when necessary.

To some, titans seem like gods. With their powers they can
cause things to happen that surely only a god could. They are fi-
ery and passionate, displaying emotions with greater purity and
less reservation than mortal beings. Titans are quick to anger, but
quicker still to forgive. In fits of rage they destroy mountains and
in moments of passion will create empires. They are in all ways
godlike and in all ways larger than life.

And yet is should be noted that titans are not gods. They are
beings that make their home in Olympus and walk among the
gods. Yet they are not omnipotent, omniscient rulers of the
planes. Sometimes their godlike passions and godlike rages make
them seem like deities, however, and it is common for whole civi-
lizations to mistake them for deities.
Titan

In one society, Jeuron, a titan with dominion over knowledge,
was revered as a god for centuries. Those mortals built their
whole civilization around him and Jeuron revelled in the worship.
He even walked among them occasionally to see their love and
admiration. But Odin, of the Norse mythos, discovered his de-
ception and punished Jeuron by shackling him to the bottom of
the deepest sea for 100 years.

Titans have a natural affinity for storm giants. Those giants are
the closest beings the titans have found to peers and they will
readily befriend them. In any group of titans, there is a 35%
chance that they will be accompanied by one or more storm gi-
ants. Although titans can sometimes be condescending by nature,
they never treat the storm giants as subordinates or inferiors.

On Olympus, titans have developed a culture similar to what
they found there. They wear similar clothing, eat similar foods,
play similar music, etc. It is unclear why this has occurred. Per-
haps the titans, in a godlike whim, adopted their favorite mortal
lifestyle. Such would not be unusual for these great beings.

Titans primarily dwell in great palaces and mansions in Olym-
pus where they live their lives whimsically. There they will dance,
sing, study, debate and engage in all other manner of activities
with titanic proportion. If a titan finds something that interests
him, it would not be unusual for him to study it in great detail for
many weeks, only to leave it when his interest has waned. They
may also engage in debates or arguments that last literally for
weeks at a time. These debates might end in a jovial laughter and
good spirits or in thunder and rage. Such are the whims of titans.

Ecology: Titans are basically identical to humans, except much
larger. What makes them immortal is not known. Perhaps it is
their enchanted existence in the halls of Olympus.

These giants are commonly known to experience the same
range of emotions as humans do. They develop idiosyncrasies as
humans do, also. In fact, titan mannerisms emulate those of hu-
mans very closely. Again, it is difficult to tell if the titans are
whimsically copying humans, or vice versa.

Titans, being godlike creatures, tend to be very diverse and
unique. Each individual titan (or sometimes group of titans) have
a special power is that related to their personality or sphere of in-
fluence. These powers are very different, and usually very strong
(which is why titans are worth more experience points than other
monsters in their HD range). Some examples of the powers of a ti-
tan are explained below:

MC8

Algorn, a titan that has influence over the seas, has the ability to
create water whenever he chooses to, This water can be vast as
he desires, up to the volume of a medium-sized lake. Algorn
can simply cause the water to flow, he can cause it to jet out
from his hands (washing away everything in its path away), or
he can even cause the water to be frozen.

Mane, a titan with dominion over felines, has the ability to
change into a giant form of any cat. When he transforms, he is
instantly cured of all wounds, poisons, and diseases. Mane
may change into a cat and back again five times per day.

Porphy] is a titan with the power of growth. He may cause any
immature life to grow to maturity. Thus, he can cause crops to
grow, he can make a boy grow to manhood, etc. Porphyl is
very wise and would never abuse his ability.

Malephus, a titan with influence over law and justice can unerr-
ingly detect any spoken lie and any bad intention. He is often
used by many greater powers in trials of justice. Malephus is
totally honest; he is incapable of lies or deception.

Syllia, a titan with power over love, can remove any negative
feelings from any being (except deities and powers). She has
the ability to remove hatred, unhappiness, depression, etc.
Syllia cannot remove the feeling permanently, but for at least a
day or so. The deities of the upper planes often employ her
power when trying to stop wars.

Girzon, a titan with dominion over death, can take the life from
any living being. It should be noted that Girzon has never used
this ability unless commanded to by a deity. Girzon’s restraint
and self-control is revered by other titans.

Greater Titans: Rumors exist of a race of titans more powerful
still than common titans. These greater titans are said to be very
close to the gods and always accompany one (with some deities
and powers being attended by more than one greater titan), Per-
haps greater titans were formally common titans who have
grown so great in power that the gods brought them closer to
themselves. Such matters are not common knowledge.

It is very difficult to provide combat statistics for greater titans.
Like the gods themselves, greater titans are simply not subject to
aggression from nondivine beings. They are never harmed by
such attacks.

 

 
Translator

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Upper planes
FREQUENCY: Common
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: None
INTELLIGENCE: High (13-14)
TREASURE: None
ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 8

MOVEMENT: Fl 64 (A)

HIT DICE: 5

THACO: Miss only on a 1
NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: Stun

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Spell erasing
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Deific intervention
MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: S (3' diameter sphere)
MORALE: Fearless (19-20)
XP VALUE: 3,000

Messengers of the very gods themselves, translators are human-
oid beings that travel the planes at tremendous speeds, relaying
messages of great importance. These speedy couriers of the
powers look like spheres of shining silver around three feet in di-
ameter. They pulse with an inner, yellow hue when they are car-
rying a message, They have no apparent “front” or “back,” and
exhibit no corporeal form whatsoever.

All translators can speak any language they find necessary. It
will take approximately 30 seconds for one to pick up a new lan-
guage. Note that the translator does not have to hear the language
spoken—when in the presence of creatures who speak a language
unknown to the translator, it will pick up that language magi-
cally.

Combat: There are two occasions and two occasions only when a
translator will fight: when they are being directly prevented from
delivering a message and when they cannot outrun an attacker.
With their impressive speed and great maneuverability, transla-
tors are very likely to be able to outrun anything attacking them,
and will do so to avoid combat when they are not delivering a
message.

If forced into combat, translators attack with a shining silver
beam of light. Translators the ability to almost always hit in com-
bat, missing only ona roll of 1. The translator need simply choose
its target and a it will hit. The silver beam of energy has a power-
ful stun affect. Anyone struck by the beam will be automatically
stunned for 1d12 -3 rounds. No save is possible. If the result is
zero or less, the beam did not carry sufficient power to stun its
target. Anyone stunned by a translator will be unable to move or
think for the duration of the effect. The target will, in effect, be in
a total state of suspended animation. It also carries the devastat-
ing effect of wiping spell casters’ minds clean of memorized spells.

 

 

 

 

 

The gods of the upper planes take very special care of the trans-
lators. These beings literally carry the plans and will of the gods
from plane to plane. Therefore, if a translator is attacked while
delivering a message, the sending deity will always become aware
of this and send aid. In such an instance, roll d100. If the result is
99 or less, the deity will send one of his aasimon (q.v.) servants to
help. If the result is 00, roll again. If the second roll is 99 or less,
the deity sends 1d6é +1 aasimon servants. If the result is 00, the de-
ity himself will appear. Aid of this type will arrive in 1d10 rounds
after the translator is attacked.

Habitat/Society: Translators are the prized messengers of the
gods. They are quiet and unassuming creatures, but carry great
importance with them.

Translators do not have a society. They are content in their ab-
solute servitude to the gods. They are not rewarded in any way. A
translator's entire existence consists of either delivering a message
or waiting patiently for a message to deliver.

These couriers are completely incapable of altering a message.
They will always relay it with perfect accuracy, maintaining not
only the words but also the spirit of the message's intent.

Ecology: Translators derive their sustenance from the energy of
the gods. They do not eat, drink, or sleep. If not for the fact that
they are sentient and intelligent, translators might easily be mis-
taken for mere automatons. As intelligent beings, translators can
evaluate situations and conduct themselves in the best manner for
the completion of their message-bearing missions.

 
T’uen-rin

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Arcadia
FREQUENCY: Very rare
ORGANIZATION: Solitary
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Herbivore
INTELLIGENCE: Supra-genius (19-20)
TREASURE: I,H
ALIGNMENT: Lawful good
NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: -8
MOVEMENT: 24, Fl 48 (A)
HIT DICE: 16

THACO: 5

NO, OF ATTACKS: 3
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-10/1-10/2-20
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Awe

SPECIAL DEFENSES: _Never surprised
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 90%

SIZE: H (13’ long)
MORALE: Fanatic (17-18)
XP VALUE: 150,000

T‘uen-rin are a race of extra-planar ki-rin that dwell in the peace-
ful plains of Arcadia. These creatures normally have little to do
with the world of mortals or ki-rin, but are occasionally seen on
the Prime Material plane performing some mission of great im-
portance.

They look much like their more common counterparts, having
shining coats of golden scales that scintillate with seemingly im-
possible shades of color. Their thick manes and tails are a deep,
dark gold. Their horns and hooves are a pinkish ivory color. A
t'uen-rin’s eyes are deep orbs of beautiful violet.

T'uen-rin speak the common language, and can also communi-
cate using telepathy or empathy.

Combat: Although t'uen-rin are peaceful and good, they will
fearlessly attack evil wherever the encounter it. The creatures are
capable of a powerful hoof/hoof/horn attack inflicting 1-10
points of damage per hoof and 2-20 points of damage with the
great horn. These natural attacks are capable of doing damage to
any creature, even those normally only hit by magical weapons.

T'uen-rin may use mage spells at 20th level of ability. Each day
they may use 15 1st-level spells, 14 2nd-level spells, 13 3rd level
spells, etc., all the way up to 7 9th-level spells.

Tuen-rin may, once per day, create an awe effect, using their
nearly divine presence to stun opponents. When creating an awe
effect, the t'uen-rin rears up on its hind legs and lets out a com-
manding cry. Any being of a nondivine nature must immediately
a save vs. spells at a —6 penalty or be in awe. Awed beings will
stand and stare at the t'uen-rin for a number of rounds equal to 20
minus their wisdom score. For example, if a t'uen-rin awes two
opponents—one of a 15 wisdom, the other of a 10 wisdom—the
former will be stunned for five rounds, the latter for ten. Nor-
mally, a t‘uen-rin will not attack awed opponents unless they are
of great evil and need to be destroyed.

All t‘uen-rin have powerful telepathic powers that allow them
to read conscious thought, thus making it impossible to surprise
one. They may also use this ability to detect lie without error. A
t‘uen-rin, in addition to possessing all abilities of a ki-rin (see
Monstrous Compendium, Volume II, ki-rin entry), have the fol-
lowing divine abilities:

 

 

 

 

 

 

® Goodharvest: By using this ability, a t'uen-rin can cause any
crops in a 20 square mile area to grow at maximum speed
and yield a maximum harvest. They will often use this abil-
ity to aid farmers in trouble or reward those who have lived
with integrity.

e Attack Evil: t'uen-rin, with the divine help of a god, can
make a direct telepathic attack on all evil creatures in a 50
square mile area. Any evil beings of a nondivine nature in
the area of affect of this power must make a saving throw vs.
spells or migrate out of the area within one week. Evil crea-
tures will not enter the area for at least a month. This power
is used to rid places of strong evil presences.

e End Blight: When a t'uen-rin uses its end blight ability, it can
stop the spread of disease or plague within a 100 mile radius.
This will cure all nonevil creatures within the area and stop
the spread of the disease for one year.

Habitat/Society: t'uen-rin are motivated purely by the pursuit of
good. They will naturally seek out and attempt to destroy evil.
This does not, however, mean that t'uen-rin will blindly attack
evil strongholds. They will not, for instance, travel to the Abyss
or other similar place of strong evil where they obviously would
not survive.

The t'uen-rin dwell among the clouds in Arcadia and are very
lofty in attitude. They will never venture into the Prime Material
plane to meddle in the affairs of men unless commanded by a de-
ity or other powerful good entity.

Ecology: In some cultures (particularly oriental), the t'uen-rin is
seen as the strongest embodiment of good. They are generally
characterized as female, and no male t'uen-rins are known to ex-
ist.

 

 
Vaporighu

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Gehenna

FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore

INTELLIGENCE: High (13-14)

TREASURE: C,M

ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 0

MOVEMENT: 9

HIT DICE: 10

THACO: 11

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Armor destruction, noxious gas,
cause fear

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Hit only by cold iron weapons

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 40%

SIZE: L (8' tall)

MORALE: Elite (13-14)

XP VALUE: 24,000

Vaporighu are evil creatures of the underworld that lurk in the
foul furnaces of Gehenna. They are scavengers of sorts, lying in
wait for unwary travelers.

Fat and grotesque, the vaporighu are both disgusting and horri-
fying to behold. They have great, bloated, vaguely humanoid
bodies that vary in colors, mostly sick pinks and purples. Pulsat-
ing arteries lie just below the surface of their skin, constantly
moving about in hideous dance of living gore. Their wet, slimy
body hair that reeks of death and decay.

Vaporighu have their own language and speak no others.

Combat: Vaporighu have a variety of attacks, including their
punch, a gas attack, and causing fear.

Anyone of less than 7 HD that views one of these gruesome
creatures must make a saving throw vs. spells with a —4 penalty.
If the save is failed, the opponent will be stricken with fear and
will flee for 1-6 melee rounds. Those of 7 HD or greater that view
a vaporighu must save vs. spells with no penalty or flee in panic
for 1-6 melee rounds.

A favored attack mode of the vaporighu is to emit a cloud of
noxious, deadly gas. To make the attack, the vaporighu bloats up
to about 150% of it’s normal size and then jets out in a cloud of
bright green gas. Like a cloudkill spell, this gas will slay any crea-
ture with fewer than 4+1 hit dice, cause creatures with 4+1 to
5 +1 hit dice to roll saving throws vs. poison with —4 penalties or
be slain, and creatures up to 6 hit dice to roll unmodified saving
throws vs. poison or be slain. Since the gas effects the skin, holding
one’s breath has no effect on the lethality of the attack. Those
above 6 hit dice must leave the cloud immediately or suffer 1-10
points of poison damage each round. The cloud is 10 feet in diame-
ter.

Although they prefer not to, vaporighu can make attacks with
their thick-fingered hands. Their punch inflicts 1-6 points of dam-
age per hit. Also, with each such hit the vaporighu deposits its
slimy fluid on the surface of its opponent. If not cleaned off
within one hour of contact, the fluid will destroy clothing and ar-
mor. Armor will begin to disintegrate after one hour, lending less
and less protection as time passes. Armor will lose one “armor
class value” every three hours until it is destroyed. For example, if
a vaporighu is attacking someone wearing chain mail armor (AC
5) and the armor is not cleaned within one hour, then it will begin

 

 

 

 

to disintegrate, After nine hours, the chain mail will be dissolved
to the point of only affording AC 8. After 15 hours, the armor is
useless. Magical armor may make a saving throw vs. acid to
avoid this.

Additionally, vaporighu have the following spell-like powers, at
10th-level of spell use, usable once per round, one at a time, at will:

animate object
continual light
enlarge

fly
misdirection
produce flame
sleep

trip

Vaporighu may also attempt to gate in 1-4 night hags once per
day with a 25% chance of success. They loathe to do this, how-
ever, because they must somehow reward the hags for the service
rendered.

Due to their powerful and evil nature, vaporighu are subject to
attacks only from cold-wrought iron weapons. Even the most
powerful enchanted weapons will do these creatures no harm if
they are not made of cold-wrought iron. Vaporighu are not sub-
ject to being surprised while on Gehenna. Consequently, they will
never surprise opponents due to the constant bellows-like wheez-
ing sound they make.

Habitat/Society: Vaporighu are petty, cruel creatures with no pur-
pose save that of destruction. These scavengers hide in the
shadows and corners of the foul furnaces of Gehenna and will at-
tack any creatures that pass by them. Whether they attack in
hope of gaining power or for food is unknown, but vaporighu are
relentless in their assault.

Ecology: As has been noted, there is no apparent motivation for
these creatures’ savage attacks. They are, perhaps, the carrion of
the lower planes, living on the deaths of others.
Warden Beast

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Beastlands

FREQUENCY: Rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary (but with common animals)

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Per animal type

DIET: Per animal type

INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)

TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Neutral

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: 4

MOVEMENT: Per animal type

HIT DICE: 6 or animal type’s HD +3 HD
(whichever higher)

THACO: 15 (or better)

NO, OF ATTACKS: Per animal

DAMAGE/ATTACK: Per animal +2 (see below)

SPECIAL ATTACKS: See below

SPECIAL DEFENSES: See below

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 25%

SIZE: Per animal (generally slightly larger)

MORALE: Steady (11-12)

XP VALUE: 8,500 + animal type

Warden beasts are higher forms of animals, They generally act as
leaders and planners for common animals in the Beastlands, look-
ing out for their general welfare.

In appearance, warden beasts look like the animal over which
they have dominion (i.e. bear warden beasts look like bears, wolf
warden beasts look like wolves, etc.). They tend to be slightly
larger and more archetypical than the common varieties. Warden
beasts also seem to have a look of intelligence in their eyes and on
their faces.

Warden beasts speak common, can speak with all animals, and
can emply empathy, at will.

Combat: All warden beasts have the same natural attack forms as
the animal over which they have dominion. Generally, they do
slightly more damage than the common variety—add 2 points of
damage per hit. Also, their attacks will damage beasts normally
hit only by magically enchanted weapons (but cannot damage
those normally hit only by +3 or greater weapons). In all other
combat respects, they are identical to the original animal.

Warden beasts generally do not fight unless it is in the best in-
terest of the animals over which they have dominion. They will
not hesitate, however, to fight when it is necessary.

In addition to abilities in conjunction with their animal type,
warden beasts have the following spell-like abilities, at 10th level
of spell use, usable once per round, one at a time, at will:

animal friendship

animal growth, 1 time per day

animal summoning I

commune with nature, 1 time per day

cure light wounds, 1 time per day on any given being
detect snares & pits

entangle

plant growth, 3 times per day

protection from evil

sticks to snakes, 1 time per day

These animal benefactors also are part of a larger network of
nature. Warden beasts are 90% likely to become aware of any
major event that occurs within 5 miles of their home. As a result
of this network, they may raise an alarm in the nearby ecosystem
that will set all wild animals within the 5 mile radius on a pan-

 

 

 

 

 

icked charge. This is, of course, only used in absolute emergen-
cies (i.e. large forest fires, etc.).

If a warden beast or its common animal counterparts are seri-
ously threatened, it may attempt to summon their applicable ani-
mal lord (q.v.). This call for help may only be performed one time
per day and there is a 35% chance that it will be successful.

Habitat/Society: Warden beasts are part of a chain or network of
nature in the upper planes that starts with an animal lord and
ends with the common variety of animal. Warden beasts fall be-
tween the two. They act as go-betweens and protectors over the
animals.

The powers of the upper planes (particularly the Beastlands)
have little interface with the warden beasts. These beings are part
of a natural ecosystem that is autonomous of the deities and often
beneath their notice.

Ecology: Warden beasts are neutrally aligned. They are con-
cerned only with matter pertaining to their animal type. Acting
on pure instincts of nature, they sometimes seem to act in an
amoral or maybe even evil way. This is not the case, They are
simply not concerned with the affairs of the gods, mankind, or
the societies of either.

Warden beasts can mate with each other, with animal lords of
their species, or with common animals of their species. They
breed true—offspring will always be a warden beast whenever at
least one parent is a warden beast.

A warden beast's diet is identical to that of its species.

 

 

 
Yugoloth

MC8

 

 

& Yugoloths are the absolute evil of the lower planes, These crea-

tures inhabit the planes of Acheron, Gehenna, Hades, and Tar-
terus, often acting as mercenaries in the Blood War between the
baatezu and tanar’ri.

An identifying characteristic of all yugoloths is their complete
disregard for loyalty. These wretched creatures will turn on their
employers for greater payment by another. It is very tricky to use
yugoloths in a mercenary situation, and one must be sure to have
power over them before moving into a potentially important bat-
tle.

Yugoloths are arranged two distinct categories: greater yugo-
loths and lesser yugoloths. The greater tend to act as officers, rul-
ing not by any natural authority but by their power alone. Lesser
yugoloths are the rank-and-file of these fiends, serving diligently
for promises of power and wealth. They are divided as follows:

Greater Lesser
arcanaloth dergholoth
nycaloth hydroloth
ultroloth mezzoloth
piscoloth
yagnoloth

The yugoloths are marked by bickering and quarreling
amongst their own numbers. Though individually ferocious,
they are extremely inefficient formation warriors and are only
used by the baatezu and tanar’ri in the Blood War because each
fears the other might gain an advantage with the yugoloths.

Another common way in which the yugoloths are used is to
purchase the services of the other side's forces. The yugoloths are
so greedy and avaricious that they will gladly turn on their em-
ployers if the price is right. Fortunately for the yugoloths, such
battle reports rarely return back to the Nine Hells and the Abyss
respectively. When they do, the offending yugoloths are most of-
ten hunted and punished with unimaginable torture. Such is not a
deterrent, however—the greed of a yugoloth runs very deep.
Yugoloths are affected by the listed attack forms as noted be-

ow:

 

Attack Damage
acid none
cold double
electricity (lightning) full

fire (dragon, magical) none
gas (poisonous, etc.) half
iron weapons none™
magic missile full
poison none
silver weapon full

“unless affected by normal weapons, in which case damage will

All yugoloths are able to perform the following, at will:

alter self

animate dead

cause disease, reverse of cure disease
charm person

improved phantasmal force

produce flame

teleport without error

Yugoloths also have the ability to gate in their fellows when
necessary. However, this can be as much a liability as and asset.
Due to the quarreling, bickering nature of the creatures, there is a
25% that gated yugoloths will turn upon their summoner.

The Book of Keeping

Because yugoloths are servants and mercenaries by nature,
they are naturally prone to summonings and conjurations by
spell casters on the Prime Material plane. Any time a mage at-
tempts to summon a lower planar being, he is 40% likely to sum-
mon a yugoloth, although more likely to summon a gehreleth
(q.v.).

However, there is a work that details the processes of summon-
ing yugoloths, both greater and lesser. This ancient tome was
penned by some unknown hand and relates much regarding the
magical summoning and control of the yugoloth. This manual
even goes so far as to give personal names of some of the greater
yugoloths. Of course, any spell caster foolish enough to utter one
of these lower planar designations of power had better have
strong protection or the creature so named will surely smite the
summoner and devour his life force. There are at least four
known copies of the Book of Keeping, but the exact location of
these tomes of power is unknown.

The only class that can make use of one of these tomes is the
conjurer specialist wizard. He must be wary, however, for the
greater yugoloth are powerful and vengeful. Even a mighty con-
jurer will have trouble binding one and those lower-planar crea-
tures’ memories are immortal.

General of Gehenna

Somewhere in the brimstone wastes of Gehenna, there roams
an ultroloth so powerful that none will contest his power. He is
the General of Gehenna and the ruler of everything located there.
Many ultroloths search for this great general in hopes of serving
with him. It is believed that to serve with the General of Gehenna
is to gain considerable power and prestige amongst the lower pla-
nar entities. Whatever that case, the General is rarely seen and
has never been found save when he has chosen to be. His personal
name is not known by any and even the Book of Keeping does not
make mention of this powerful and thoroughly evil entity. Per-
haps some secrets are best kept unrevealed.

 
Yugoloth, Greater—Arcanaloth

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Lower planes

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Supra-genius (19-20)

TREASURE: H

ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil

NO. APPEARING: 1-3

ARMOR CLASS: -8

MOVEMENT: 12, Fl 18 (B)

HIT DICE: 12 +24

THACO: 9

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-4/1-4/2-12

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Claw sting

SPECIAL DEFENSES: +3 or better weapons to hit, spell
immunity

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 60%

SIZE: M (6' tall)

MORALE: Champion (15-16)

XP VALUE: 49,500

The arcanaloth are the record keepers of the yugoloth. All trans-
actions for services rendered in the Blood War go through them—
they are the maintainers of contracts. As yugoloths go, they are a
civilized breed.

An arcanaloth appears as a robed human with the head of a
fanged jackal or war dog. Arcanaloths are usually snarling and
have looks of great hatred in their eyes. However, they do not
consider themselves to be foul animals, and keep themselves well
groomed and dressed.

As spokesmen for their race, arcanaloths can speak and write

all languages.

Combat: The physical attack of the powerful arcanaloth consists
of a claw/claw/bite routine. Each claw inflicts 1-4 points of dam-
age per hit and causes a powerful stinging sensation on its oppo-
nent that causes him to be at a —1 penalty (cumulative per hit) on
his attack dice. Bless, neutralize poison, or slow poison will elimi-
nate these effects. Otherwise, the effects are permanent. Arcana-
loths enjoy inflicting pain and torment with their claws. The bite
of an arcanaloth inflicts 2-12 points of damage per successful hit.

All arcanaloths possess all the abilities of a 12th-level mage.
They will commonly memorize destructive spells, but they keep a
wise eye on their escape and defensive spells for good measure.
Arcanaloths should have a randomly determined spellbook.

In addition to those available to all yugoloths, arcanaloths
have the following spell-like powers usable once per round, one
at a time, at will:

advanced illusion, 1 time per day
continual darkness

control temperature, 10’ radius
fear, 1 time per day

fly, unlimited duration

heat metal

invisibility

magic missile

shape change, to any humanoid form
telekinesis

warp wood

Arcanaloth are extremely intelligent and will use these spell-
like abilities to their best advantage. In general, these creatures

 

 

avoid hand-to-hand combat.

An arcanaloth may attempt to gate in 1-6 mezzoloths, 1-2
dergholoths, or 1 arcanaloth. They may attempt this but once per
day with a 40% chance of success.

The powerful arcanaloths are harmed only by weapons of +3
or greater magical enchantment. Due to their extremely en-
chanted nature, arcanaloths are immune to mind affecting spells.
These keen creatures will see such enchantments for what they re-
ally are. Arcanaloth may never be surprised while on the lower
planes. They can only be destroyed if fought on the plane of Ge-
henna, which is the source of their power.

Habitat/Society: Arcanaloths are record and contract keepers for
the yugoloths. These powerful creatures negotiate all bargains
with baatezu and tanar’ri and play the two sides against each
other with practiced ease.

One of the tactics of the arcanaloths is to openly discuss one of
the fiends’ offers with their rivals in hopes raising the stakes. For
example, if a baatezu force was attempting to siege the Lakes of
Molten Iron on the first layer of the Abyss and they offered 1,000
mortal life forces and the power of death for one year to the yugo-
loths to help them, an arcanaloth will go to the tanar'ri and tell
them the offer. Usually the tanar’ri will give a counter offer for the
yugoloths to help them defend against the baatezu.

Ecology: Arcanaloths, like all yugoloths, play a casual role in the
Blood War. They are the traders and barterers and the master
schemers behind the yugoloths’ success as mercenaries. Of
course, the arcanaloth do not perform this task for the “racial
pride” of it, but rather for personal wealth and power.

There is a powerful incantation in the book of keeping that de-
scribes the creation of a potion that will grant success in any ven-
ture. A shred of flesh from the heart of an arcanaloth is required.

The preferred dwelling place of the arcanaloth is the plane of
Gehenna as they draw power from the mighty furnaces there.
The will never leave the plane if at all possible and only do so for
very brief periods of time.

 

 
Yugoloth, Greater—Nycaloth

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Lower planes

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore

INTELLIGENCE; Exceptional to genius (15-18)

TREASURE: Q(X 10), X

ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil

NO. APPEARING: 1 (or 1-2, but very rarely)

ARMOR CLASS: -6

MOVEMENT: 12, Fl 36 (C)

HIT DICE: 11+22

THACO: w

NO. OF ATTACKS: Zorl

DAMAGFE/ATTACK: 9-16/9-16 or by weapon +8 (strength
bonus)

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Magical axe, wound seepage

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Spell immunity, +2 or better

weapons to hit
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 70%

 

SIZE: L (9' tall and broad)
MORALE: Champion (15-16)
XP VALUE: 66,000

Observers and reporters, the nycaloths are reconnaissance ex-
perts that travel through the various lower planes and observing
the tanar'ri and baatezu in their eternal feud.

Nycaloths look very much like fiends, having the characteristic
gargoyle-like appearance. They are very large, broad humanoids
with powerful limbs and great wings. These creatures have thick,
light green skin with a leathery texture. Their wicked claws are
sharp and thick, obviously making excellent weapons.

Nycaloths communicate using telepathy.

Combat: Nycaloths most commonly use weapons. These hulking
creatures are fond of giant two-headed axes that inflict 2-16 +8
points of damage. These axes are very commonly enchanted,
with 90% being magical in nature, though of common variety
(i.e. +1, +2, etc.). If an axe is enchanted, there is a 20% chance
that it will of special enchantment (i.e. vorpal, etc.). The qualities
of special blades should be determined randomly. Nycaloths are
+4 to hit with weapons, and often (75%) employ shields.

Nycaloths also have the power to attack with their claws that
each inflict 9-16 points of damage per successful hit. These
wicked claws cause seeping wounds that will continue to bleed
for 1-6 points of damage per wound per round until healed magi-
cally (i.e. cure light wounds, etc.).

Enchantment/charm spells never affect nycaloths.

In addition to those available to all yugoloths, nycaloths also
have the following spell-like powers, usable as indicated, at will:

command, 3 times per day
comprehend languages, always active
detect invisibility, always active
detect magic, always active
dimension door, 3 times per day
dispel magic

enlarge, or its reverse, reduce
fear, by touch

invisibility

mirror image, 3 times per day
polymorph self

project image

read magic, always active

 

 

 

reverse gravity, 1 time per day
wind walk

word of recall, 1 time per day
wraithform, 1 time per day

Nycaloths may attempt to gate in 1-10 mezzoloths, 1-3 dergho-
loths, or 1 additional nycaloth. The gate may be attempted once
per day with a 35% chance of success.

Habitat/Society: Despite the fact that nycaloths are possibly the
most powerful of the greater yugoloths, they are afforded the
least status. Nycaloths always act in a careful and calculating
manner aimed at maximizing their personal power and safety.
These creatures are well suited to being scouts. They have the in-
nate ability to travel to any of the lower planes at will. Nycaloths
commonly travel to the Nine Hells and the Abyss in order to view
battles between the baatezu and tanar’ri. They will report their
findings to the arcanaloths who use the information in their ma-
nipulations of “contracts”.

Nycaloths are bitter and jealous of the status of the other
greater yugoloths. They are constantly planning and scheming to
increase their status among yugoloths, often bullying the lesser
yugoloths to get attention, It is not uncommon for these creatures
to destroy whole companies of mezzoloths and dergholoths in a
fit of rage.

Female and male nycaloths are nearly identical, certainly im-
possible to tell apart for any but their own kind. Mated pairs give
birth to three young at a time. These young are allowed to grow
for 100 days, at which time they are pitted against each other ina
battle to the death. Only one will be allowed to grow to
maturity—the one that triumphs over its siblings.

Ecology: Nycaloths are carnivores, but may have once been scav-
engers since they appear to prefer sinew and rotting flesh to fresh
meat.

 
Yugoloth, Greater—Ultroloth

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Lower planes

FREQUENCY: Very rare

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Supra-genius (19-20)

TREASURE: G,R

ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: -8

MOVEMENT: 15, Fl 15 (C), Sw 15

HIT DICE: 13 +26

THACO: 7

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-12/1-12 or weapon +9 (strength
bonus)

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Magical weapon, gaze of fascination

SPECIAL DEFENSES: +3 or better weapons to hit, never
surprised

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 60%

SIZE: M (6 1/2’ tall)

MORALE: Champion (15-16)

XP VALUE: 84,000

Ultroloths are the strange, enigmatic rulers of the yugoloths.
These creatures hold sway over their underlings by the force of
their will and their reputation for cruelty.

These ruling yugoloths appear as faceless humanoids with
large eyes that resemble fire-opals. They have dark gray skin and
typically wear flowing capes or cloaks.

Ultroloths communicate using telepathy.

Combat: Ultroloths, though evil, are cerebral and reserved. They
will rarely enter combat and rarely have to. Their physical attack
consist of two hand strikes. Their dark and powerful touch in-
flicts 1-12 points of searing energy damage per round. Ultroloths
have a strength of 21 (+9 damage adjustment).

An ultroloth may also be encountered carrying a weapon.
They are fond of swords and great pole-arms that they wield with
expert precision. The weapons will always be at least +2 or
greater magical enchantment. There is, however, a 40% chance
that the weapon will of special nature. Special weapons should be
determined randomly. Some 3% of these weapons will be ex-
tremely powerful. If this is the case, the powers and abilities of the
weapons (including any restrictions or curse) should be deter-
mined. An ultroloth will always know the full powers and func-
tions of its weapon.

Any person that meets the gaze of the ultroloth must save vs.
spells or stop fascinated (as if affected by a hold person spell),
watching the coursing of colors and patterns. Even if the person
makes his saving throw, they will not see an ultroloth, but a
dearly loved and respected person.

In addition to those available to all yugoloths, ultroloths have
the following spell-like abilities, at 15th-level of spell use, usable
once per round, at will:

air walk

alter self

animate object

bind

call lightning

color spray, 7 times per day

control winds

detect invisibility, lie, magic, poison,

 

 

 

 

and scrying, always active

* ESP

© fear

* fire storm, 1 time per day

* geas

* know alignment, always active

* mass suggestion, 1 time per day
* passwall

* pass without trace, always active
¢ read magic, always active

* shout

* solid fog

* symbol, any type, 1 time per day
* wall of fire

These creatures can also gate one yugoloth of any weaker type.
There is a 100% chance of success, and this may be performed
one time per day per type of yugoloth (there are seven others).

No attack of a nonmagical nature may affect an ultroloth.
They are harmed only by weapons of +3 or greater magical en-
chantment. Yugoloths have infravision to 240’. They are never
surprised.

Habitat/Society: Ultroloths are the absolute rulers of the yugo-
loths. None of the lower-planar mercenaries would dare disobey
an ultroloth for fear of the punishment it would bring. Even non-
yugoloths dwelling in the lower planes will steer clear of the ultro-
loths, fearing these creatures’ powers.

Note that the actual power of an ultroloth—while certainly
respectable—is not all that much greater than the other of their
kind. However, no yugoloth of lesser power knows the capabili-
ties of these rulers. They are an unknown quantity and thus
greatly feared.

Ecology: Ultroloths are the ultimate level of the corruption of the
yugoloths. Nothing occurs in the mercenary ranks that these be-
ings do not know about.

 

 

 

 

 
Yugoloth, Lesser—Dergholoth

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Lower planes

FREQUENCY: Uncommon

ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore

INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)

TREASURE: Nil

ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil

NO. APPEARING: 1-4

ARMOR CLASS: —3 (see below)

MOVEMENT: 12

HIT DICE: 8+16

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 5

DAMAGE/ATTACK: See below

SPECIAL ATTACKS: Grab, feeblemind

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Weapon parry, +1 or better weapons
to hit

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 40%

SIZE: L (8’ tall)

MORALE: Elite (13-14)

XP VALUE: 25,500

Dergholoths are natives of the plane of Hades but are found in the
planes of Tarterus and Gehenna as well, These creatures are lower
yugoloths and are used primarily as rank-and-file troops.

Dergholoths have round bodies with five arms and three legs,
and their insect-like heads can rotate 360 degrees. For this reason
they can move and change direction at will. They are extremely
strong but also extremely stupid.

Combat: The dergholoth’s five arms end in stubby, four-clawed
hands. They have a strength of 20 ( +8 damage adjustment). Each
may or may not have weapons, as determined below.

Roll Attacks (Damage)

01-60 5 claw attacks (1-4 +8)

61-85 4 claw attacks (1-4+8), 1 sword attack (1-8 +8)

86-95 3 claw attacks (1-4+8), 1 sword attack (1-8 +8),
1 spear attack (1-6 +8)

96-00 2 claw attacks (1-4 +8), 1 sword attack (1-8 +8),

1 spear attack (1-6+8), 1 battle axe attack (1-
8 +8)

Dergholoths never carry magical weapons. If the first two claw
attacks hit, the opponent has been grabbed. The dergholoth will
have a +2 bonus on its attack dice when striking a grabbed oppo-
nent, but the two grabbing arms may not attack. Grabbed oppo-
nents may fight, but may not move or retreat until the dergholoth
is defeated. The victim may break free by making a one half
strength check.

One time per day, a dergholoth may begin chattering sense-
lessly and clicking its mouth pincers rapidly. This has the power
of feeblemind on any creature of less that 7 HD that hears the at-
tack. Those beings must make a saving throw vs. spells or be fee-
bleminded for 1-6 melee rounds, after which they will return to
normal.

Armed dergholoths may parry with their weapons instead of
attacking. For each weapon used to parry, the dergholoth’s armor
class if reduced by 2. For example, if a dergholoth with three
weapons decides to attack with one weapon and parry with two
of them, its armor class becomes ~7 for the melee round.

In addition to those available to all yugoloths, dergholoths
may use the following spell-like abilities:

 

 

 

 

 

® darkness, 15" radius
© fear
e sleep, 2 times per day

Despite their stupidity, they are stubborn creatures that are dif-
ficult to control. Dergholoths are not subject to attacks from non-
magical weapons. When on Hades, they are never surprised. The
material form of a dergholoth may be destroyed but it will reform
within a few days into another one.

Habitat/Society: Dergholoths are treated relatively poorly in
yugoloth society. They are not nearly as powerful as many of the
other types and are subjected to constant abuse from their bet-
ters. This has the effect of making the dergholoths very mean,
which in turn, serves the yugoloths well. Dergholoths make up
many of the yugoloth mercenary companies.

When not fighting battles at the beck and call of the more pow-
erful, more intelligent yugoloths, dergholoths wander Hades,
stealing and devouring larvae from the night hags. While this
sometimes results in their annihilation, they sometimes come
away with good many stolen larvae.

Sometimes the dergholoths will be seen in very large groups,
up to 500 strong, milling about in huge numbers. At such times,
they are apparently only waiting to be taken away to fight. These
unfortunate creatures seem to be aware, however dimly, that be-
ing made to fight at the hands of more powerful yugoloths is their
lot—in these hordes they await an easy roundup.

It can be argued that yugoloths are not true fiends and have no
stake in the Blood War. These ignorant creatures fight only be-
cause they are forced to by more powerful yugoloths. They likely
have no understanding of the Blood War and of the profits that
higher yugoloths make from their fighting.

Ecology: How dergholoths are created is still a mystery. None
have ever been properly examined.

 
Yugoloth, Lesser—Hydroloth

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Lower planes
FREQUENCY: Common
ORGANIZATION: Solitary (see below)
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Average (8-10)
TREASURE: LY

ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil

NO. APPEARING: 1-6 or 10-30
ARMOR CLASS: —2

MOVEMENT: 6, Glide 12 (E), Sw 24
HIT DICE: 7+14

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 3ors
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-8/1-8/1-4/1-4/1-10
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Sleep attack
SPECIAL DEFENSES: +1 or better weapons to hit
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 40%

SIZE: L (10' tall)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)

XP VALUE: 26,500

Hydroloths are elite fighting forces that are commonly used in
ambush or amphibian attacks.

These creatures are grotesque amphibians that can swim the
river Styx without losing their memories. They can be seen in
groups of 10 or more wherever Styx enters the lower planes. They
are squat humanoids with large flaps of skin under the arms used
for gliding on the air. They have frog-like faces and warty, yellow
skin.

Hydroloths communicate using telepathy.

Combat: Hydroloths have two methods of attack. If attacking
from land or water, they will use a claw/claw/bite routine. Each
raking claw attack inflicts 1-8 points of damage per hit and the
bite inflicts 1-10 points of damage. If these creatures launch them-
selves through the air and attack while gliding, they may also
take advantage of their foot claws that each strike for 1-4 points
of damage. Hydroloths will gleefully attack anything they feel
they can easily defeat.

In addition to their physical attack, hydroloths can spit a
stream of yellow, foul liquid from a gland under their tongues.
This foul liquid will inflict 1-10 points of damage on a hit and will
force the opponent to make a saving throw vs. poison. If the save
fails, he is affected as if by a powerful sleep spell. The sleep wears
off after 1-8 melee rounds, during which time the victim cannot
be awakened save by magical means.

Like all yugoloths, hydroloths may teleport without error at
will, and will sometimes use a dimension door to gain altitude for
its glide. In addition to those available to all yugoloths, hydro-
loths may use the following spell-like powers:

* conjure elemental, limitations listed below
* create water

® darkness, 15' radius

* dimension door

* water walk, as a ring or water walking

They may, twice per day, attempt to gate in another hydroloth.
There is a 50% chance of success. If encountered on the Prime
Material plane, the hydroloth may use a conjure elemental abil-
ity, making a water elemental of 12 hit dice who will fight for the
creature without being controlled. In addition to the resistances

 

 

 

 

 

 

Be

common to all yugoloths, hydroloths will take half damage from
any water-based attack form (no damage if they make their sav-
ing throw). Hydroloths are harmed only by +1 or better weap-
ons.

Habitat/Society: Hydroloths are relatively well respected in the
yugoloth community. They are used on special operations and at-
tacks that generally involve covert operations or guerilla type
actions. They, of course, specialize in amphibious and subaque-
ous warfare.

These amphibians are regarded by other yugoloths, particu-
larly the ultroloths, as valuable. Hydroloths will very often use
their favor among their betters to gain positions of power and in-
fluence. It is common, for instance, for these creatures to demand
extra wealth, or a share of the mortal life forces transferred for the
job they do. While the great yugoloths certainly have the physical
power to force the hydroloths to do their bidding, they feel it is
wiser to appease these creatures. They prefer to dwell in water,
fire, or lava, but can be found anywhere.

Ecology: In any war effort, there are certain creatures that make
profit from the carnage that takes place around them. Merce-
naries are such beings and yugoloths are mercenaries in the ex-
treme. However, few yugoloths are motivated like the hydroloths
are. These monsters delight in fighting in the Blood War. They
seem to draw strength from the terror inflicted on mortals, which
drives their blood lust still further.

Because they are sent to the Prime Material plane fairly often
for missions, a number of hydroloths have been killed or cap-
tured by mages. It has been found that several of the internal or-
gans of these creatures make excellent spell components and
alchemical mixtures for potions. A live hydroloth, which is ex-
tremely difficult to capture, might bring a high price. A dead one,
though not as valuable, will still turn a pretty gold piece.

 

 

 
Yugoloth, Lesser—Mezzoloth

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Lower planes
FREQUENCY: Common
ORGANIZATION: Group
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Low (5-7)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: 2-5

ARMOR CLASS: =4
MOVEMENT: 15

HIT DICE: 10+20
THACO: 15

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2orl
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 7-12/7-12 +7 (strength bonus)
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Magical items
SPECIAL DEFENSES: +1 or better weapons to hit
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 50%

SIZE: M (7' tall)
MORALE: Elite (13-14)
XP VALUE: 40,500

Mezzoloths are the most common yugoloths of the lower planes.
They are as plentiful as they are lowly and wretched.

Mezzoloths look like humanoid insects covered in great chitin-
ous plates. They have long, lanky arms and legs and wide, ar-
mored skulls. Mezzoloths have long, sharp claws that can cut
through most nonmagical substances. They are a dirty ivory in
color with glaring red eyes.

They have a limited form of telepathy that allows them to com-
municate with any creature of low or better intelligence.

Combat: Mezzoloths have hard hands with long claws extending
from each digit. These powerful claws are capable of inflicting 7-
12 points of damage on a successful hit. These monsters also have
an 18/00 and gain damage bonuses from that strength (+6 dam-
age adjustment).

Mezzoloths are of a highly magical nature. Consequently, these
creatures have a natural affinity with magical items. A mezzoloth
can make use of any magical item without penalty. They often use
magical weapons, and, if so, generally have a shield, as well. The
only exceptions to this are those items that are restricted by align-
ment (e.g. holy avenger) and those that affect only a specific class
(e.g. book of exalted deeds). Most of the more powerful yugo-
loths, which do not have the mezzoloth’s natural propensity for
enchanted items, recognize this as an asset and will often equip
these creatures accordingly. Solitary mezzoloths are only 5%
likely to have a magical item. For every 3 mezzoloths present,
they are 10% (cumulative) likely to have one magical item among
them. For example, if a group of 10 mezzoloths are encountered,
there is a 30% chance they will have magic, but a group of 30 or
more will always be equipped with some enchanted items. Magi-
cal items should be randomly determined.

As a result of their magical affinity, mezzoloths are also not
subject to attacks by nonmagical weapons. In fact, so deep is this
natural resistance, that +2 or greater magical weapons must em-
ployed to damage a mezzoloth.

In addition to those available to all yugoloths, mezzoloths have
the following spell-like powers, at 10th-level of spell use, usable
once per round, one at a time, at will:

e burning hands

® cause serious wounds, reverse of cure serious wounds
® cloudkill, 1 time per day

 

 

 

 

8%

°
°
*
e
s
es
°
*
s

a

darkness, 15' radius

detect invisibility, always active
detect magic

dispel magic, 2 times per day
flame strike, 1 time per day
hold person

mirror image

sleep

trip

Mezzoloths may also attempt to gate in 1-4 additional mezzo-
loths or 1-2 hydroloths. This attempt may be made one time per
day and has a 40% chance of success.

Mezzoloths can see in the infrared spectrum out to 120’. These
lower-planar soldiers are not subject to the affects of paralysis or
poisons of any kind. Cold-based attacks will cause them full dam-
age (as opposed to double damage normally taken by yugoloths).
They are immune to charm and suggestion spells.

Habitat/Society: Mezzoloths are the lowest of the yugoloths.
These creatures are the rank-and-file warriors used in yugoloth
armies. Higher yugoloths have no regard for these soldiers and
rule over them by might and force of will alone. Due to their lack
of great intelligence, the mezzoloths have accepted their lot. In
fact, the abuse they receive from above has made them more vi-
cious, toughening them for more brutal combat.

Mezzoloths have little motivation when not fighting in a mer-
cenary army. The tend to wander the lower planes (particularly
the Abyss) in search of creatures to torment. They are fond of tor-
menting lemures when they can find those wretched monstrosi-
ties.

Ecology: Sages have never been able to ascertain exactly from
where the mezzoloths are formed. They appear to be yugoloth
adaptations of some other evil creature, but they have no link to
the Prime Material plane. They may be beings brought to the
Abyss from some alternate Prime Material plane.

 
Yugoloth, Lesser—Piscoloth

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Lower planes
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Group
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: Very (11-12)
TREASURE: E
ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil
NO. APPEARING: 2-8

ARMOR CLASS: 5
MOVEMENT: 6, Sw 18
HIT DICE: 9+18
THACO: 11

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 2-16/2-16
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Severing, sting

 

SPECIAL DEFENSES: Never surprised, +1 or better
weapons to hit

MAGIC RESISTANCE: 40%

SIZE: M (5’ tall)

MORALE: Elite (13-14)

XP VALUE: 40,500

Piscoloths are the sergeants and overseers of the armies of yugo-
loth mercenaries. These creatures hold sway over companies of
dergholoths and mezzoloths with dictatorial inflexibility.

The fish-tailed, walleyed piscoloth has the red, chitinous body
of a lobster, the talons of a bird, and the head of a carrion crawler.
The piscoloth’s arms, while human-like, end in a set of crab-like
pincers. This creature is found throughout the lower planes wher-
ever there lurk the armies of the yugoloths.

Piscoloths communicate using telepathy.

Combat: The faceted eyes, bulging from the sides of the monster's
head, give the piscoloth the ability to see around and behind so
that it cannot be surprised.

Using its mighty pincers, the piscoloth can inflict 2-16 points of
damage per hit. These powerful claws also have the ability to
sever limbs. Any hit of an unmodified roll of 20 has that possibil-
ity. If an opponent is so struck, he must make a saving throw vs.
paralyzation or lose a limb (60% arm, 35% leg, 5% head). He
may gain a +2 bonus if wearing metal armor ( +1 for each “plus”
if magical armor). For example, if a piscoloth scores an unmodi-
fied 20 against a man in chain mail +2, the opponent receives a
+4 bonus to his saving throw.

The alien-looking creatures have a special tentacle attack that
they may make against a single creature. Anyone so struck by a
piscoloth’s tentacle will receive 1-10 points of damage from their
painful, stinging effect. The tentacles also inject a venom into the
victim that will cause a paralysis. A saving throw vs. paralyza-
tion is allowed, but with a —2 penalty. If a neutralize poison spell
or other similar healing means are not employed within 6 turns,
the victim will die. If the saving throw is successful, the victim is
instead slowed for 1-6 rounds.

In addition to those available to all yugoloths, piscoloths have
the following spell-like abilities, at 10th-level of spell use, usable
one time per round, one at a time, at will:

® bind

® blink

* emotion

* jump

* know alignment
* meld into stone

 

 

 

 

 

® phantasmal killer, 2 times per day

® protection from good

® resist fire

® scare

® stinking cloud

These creatures are prodigious summoners. They can gate in 1-
8 mezzoloths three times per day with no chance of failure. They
may also attempt to gate in 1-2 additional piscoloths once per day
with a 35% chance of success.

Also, due to its aquatic nature, all water-based attacks are at
—1 on damage per die.

Habitat/Society: Piscoloths are sergeants and overlords. They are
in charge of maintaining order—or some semblance thereof—
among the armies of the yugoloths. They have very short life
spans, however, having to answer to the easily-angered, more
powerful yugoloths. Keeping order in a yugoloth army is akin to
passing a planet through the eye of a needle. Piscoloths do, how-
ever, derive pleasure from their tasks, for they are cruel and hate-
ful. They bully weaker creatures whenever possible.

Piscoloths are one of the few yugoloths that will cooperate in
groups. They are commonly found in groups of five or six and
will be ruling over one or more companies of mezzoloths. They
will generally maintain order through destruction of those who
do not obey them. Of course, being few at the head of hordes of
their own abused underlings makes piscoloths subject to frequent
friendly fire.

Piscoloths play a direct role in the Blood War. They are the
yugoloths that are most often presented with an opportunity to
turn against their employers.

Ecology: Nothing is known of a piscoloth’s reproduction or biol-
ogy. They are widely believed to be the wretched creations of
fallen evil generals, but this may be simply myth.

 

 
Yugoloth, Lesser— Yagnoloth

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Lower planes
FREQUENCY: Uncommon
ORGANIZATION: Solitary

ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Carnivore
INTELLIGENCE: High to exceptional (13-16)
TREASURE: R, H

ALIGNMENT: Neutral evil

NO. APPEARING: 1

ARMOR CLASS: —4

MOVEMENT: 18

HIT DICE: 10 +20

THACO: 11

NO. OF ATTACKS: 2

DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-12 or by weapon +10
SPECIAL ATTACKS: Magical weapon, acid breath, devour
SPECIAL DEFENSES: +1 or better weapons to hit
MAGIC RESISTANCE: 40%

SIZE: L (12’ tall)

MORALE: Elite (13-14)

XP VALUE: 26,500

Yagnoloths are nobles of the yugoloth society. They are lords of
fiefs and all who enter these fiefs are subject to their rule. Despite
their power, however, they are considered lesser yugoloths.
Yagnoloths are horrible creatures with two unequal arms, one
man-sized and the other giant-sized. These creatures are large hu-

manoids with scaly red skin and bulky muscles. Their horrid

heads have great wing-like ears. Their facial features—like the
personalities of the creatures—are hateful and alien.
Yagnoloths communicate using telepathy.

Combat: The physical attack of the monster is with its huge arm.
This monstrous appendage inflicts 1-12 points of damage per
stunning hit. Yagnoloths have a 22 strength (+10 damage adjust-
ment). Anyone that is struck by this giant arm must make a sav-
ing throw vs. paralysis or be stunned for 2-12 rounds.

Yagnoloths will carry weapons in their human hand and can at-
tack with both a weapon and their giant arm. Typically they
carry swords or maces. These weapons may (30%) be enchanted
of the common variety (i.e. +1, +2, etc.). They will never be of a
special nature. Attacks by the human hand do not gain the
strength bonuses.

Yagnoloths can also attack with their foul breath weapon.
They breathe forth a cloud of acidic gas. Anyone whose exposed
skin is touched by the gas will be affected. The gas will eat away
at skin and inflict 6d6 points of damage. A saving throw vs.
breath weapon is allowed for half damage. The opponent will
also be stunned for 1-6 melee rounds (half that if a save is made)
while the acid slowly and painfully melts their skin away.

If a yagnoloth has knocked out an opponent (either with their
giant arm or breath weapon), it will attempt to feed on the oppo-
nent's life force. The yugoloth does this by placing its head
against the flesh of its victim. It will devour 10-100% of the vic-
tim’s abilities before being sated. Affected abilities are experience
points, hit points, and ability scores (strength, dexterity, etc.).
Round any fractions up. This process takes five melee rounds and
the yagnoloth may be interrupted by the victim awakening. If the
yugoloth is slain within one day, he will recover his lost abilities.
Otherwise, a restoration spell is required.

 

 

 

 

 

Yagnoloths may use shocking grasp, doing 1-8+10 points of
damage, three times per day. They may also use all the spell-like
abilities available to other yugoloths. These monsters are affected
only by +1 or better magical weapons and take but half damage
from earth-based attacks.

Habitat/Society: Yagnoloths are princes of sorts. All yugoloth-
controlled areas are divided into regions and have a governing
yagnoloth making all policies. Although yagnoloths are less pow-
erful than other yugoloths, their power is enforced by the will of
the ultroloths who divided the regions in the first place.

Yagnoloths will frequently order the execution of yugoloths in
higher positions than themselves. This is one of the ways that
these creatures plan on increasing their own already lofty status.
Needless to say, all yugoloths—save the ultroloths—despise the
yagnoloths and will savagely betray them if this can be done
safely. Hated so, yagnoloths cannot gate additional yugoloths
into a battle.

These creatures pay little attention to the rest of the workings
of yugoloth society. They are greedy and gluttonous and abuse
their power greatly.

Ecology: Yagnoloths have little care of mercenary issues. They
have little care of matter pertaining to the Blood War. These crea-
tures are merely live by the labors of their fellows. They are con-
sumers in the purest form and produce nothing of value. What
inspired the mysterious ultroloths to place these creatures in com-
mand of the provinces of the lower planes is a mystery. If they
have any qualities of merit, they are well hidden.

One can only speculate on the bizarre cross-mutation involved
in the creation of the yagnoloths. Perhaps these creatures have
giantish blood in them. Or perhaps giants have a bit of yagno-
lothish blood in them...

 

 
Zoveri

MC8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CLIMATE/TERRAIN: Seven Heavens (Lunia)
FREQUENCY: Common
ORGANIZATION: Group
ACTIVITY CYCLE: Any

DIET: Omnivore
INTELLIGENCE: High (13-14)
TREASURE: Nil
ALIGNMENT: Lawful good
NO. APPEARING: 1-4

ARMOR CLASS: 5
MOVEMENT: Sw 15 (see below)
HIT DICE: 7

THACO: 13

NO. OF ATTACKS: 1
DAMAGE/ATTACK: 1-6

SPECIAL ATTACKS: None
SPECIAL DEFENSES: Dart

MAGIC RESISTANCE: _ Nil

SIZE: M (6-7' tall)
MORALE: Steady (11-12)
XP VALUE: 20,000

Zoveri are inhabitants of Lunia, the first layer of the Seven Heav-
ens. They are beneficiaries of all who go there and are completely
friendly.

Zoveri are curious in their appearance, being much like an
aquatic centaur, From the waist down they have the lower body
and tentacles of an octopus. From the waist up zoveri have the
torso of aman or woman. They tend to look very fair and deli-
cate, much like an elf—zoveri are extremely beautiful to look
upon.

*Zoveri can speak the languages spoken by all good creatures.

Combat: These aquatic guardians are bastions of goodness, re-
specting all life as sacred. As such, they loathe combat in any
form. If pressed to fight, they have long metal spears used to
thrust for 1-6 points of damage. If they are above the surface of
the water, these spears can be thrown with the range of a javelin.
Because zoveri are ill-used to combat, all of their attack rolls are
made at —1; unless expecting trouble, they rarely have their
spears with them.

Zoveri are capable of making a darting escape in the water.
This is used if fleeing from a situation is possible. When darting, a
zoveri must drop anything he is carrying. The dart gives him a
movement rate of 36 for two melee rounds and the zoveri is 70%
likely to find a hiding spot during the dart.

Additionally, zoveri have the following spell-like powers, at
10th level of spell-use unless otherwise noted, usable once per
round, one at a time, at will:

know alignment

neutralize poison, 1 time per day per recipient

resist cold

water breathing, 20th-level spell use, 3 times per day
water walk, 3 times per day

e bless

® create food & water

e cure disease, 1 time per day
® cure serious wounds, 1 time per day per recipient
© detect evil

¢ dispel evil, 1 time per day
* forget

e fumble

e

*

*

os

oe

Zoveri may, twice per day, change into elf form. In this shape

 

 

 

 

 

they can leave the water and walk on land. The playful zoveri
love to walk on land, sometimes for long periods of time. How-
ever, the sea is their true love and to it they always return.

If four zoveri gather, they may use a conjure elemental ability,
summoning a 16 HD water elemental to aid them. To perform the
summoning, the zoveri must form a circle and join hands. Using a
complex swimming pattern and ancient songs of beckoning, they
can summon the elemental. The chance of the elemental arriving
is 10% per round of swimming, cumulative. A water elemental
will always come to the zoveri's aid to honor a pact they made
millennia ago.

Habitat/Society: The most widely known quality of the zoveri is
their kindness. They will readily and willingly render aid to any
life form that requires it. If the being in need is evil, they will ren-
der whatever aid is needed and then dispel it back to its home.

Travelers who come to the Seven Heavens first arrive on Lunia,
the first layer. Lunia is essentially a giant ocean and newcomers
are often unprepared for this. The zoveri ensure that no one who
enters the Heavens drowns in the seas of Lunia. Any person enter-
ing Lunia and struggling in the waters will be rescued in 1-3 melee
rounds by a zoveri.

Ecology: These beautiful, elf-like beings are motivated by their
internal ethics. They are an important and integral part of Lunia’s
ecology for they are literally the guardians of life there. It is un-
clear why the Seven Heavens—the demesne of the lawful good
powers—has so hazardous a doorway, but without the zoveri,
Lunia would claim many lives of the unprepared.

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

4
94
aa

wr
oe ea in
i
ie Sa
"% =
 ) ‘
|
a. ) mt
‘ie ital
Wi: pe“
at an tad
| ) .
a if :
pm a en a .
4 a 7 ~~ os baad P
a a Ng file ee
Be oy a a =
"i 4 i
. a

ort

 
 

Through portals and rifts in the fabric
of reality they have arrived—the
denizens of the Outer Planes! Here are
96 pages of monstrous entities from
planes of all-powerful magic, the
brightest ambassadors of good and the
foulest custodians of evil. Examine
beings of light who wish to stem the
tides of wickedness. But examine, too,

the fiends—beasts of ultimate evil locked in an endless, bitter
Blood War! Each page is 5-hole punched and the set includes 4
dividers with awe-inspiring, full-color art. Leave the comfortable
confines of the Prime Material Plane—the creatures of the Outer
Planes await!

ae — Lao ce
POB 756 Lf 120 Church End, Cherry Hinton
ea ae! — if Taegan Ooo ms] es)
WI 53147 U.S.A. ia hs United Kinecom

|

ISBN 1-5b07b-055-9

199] TSR, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Printed in U.S.A
ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AD&D, and the TSR logo are trademarks owned by TSR, Inc

9°781560"760559

ba de Bh

 
